table of contents item 7. management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations the following management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. our actual results may differ materially from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. factors that might cause a difference include, but are not limited to, those discussed under part i, item 1a. risk factors in this annual report on form 10-k. the following section is qualified in its entirety by the more detailed information, including our consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto, which appears elsewhere in this annual report on form 10-k. overview organization we are a leading global provider of security products and solutions operating in two segments: allegion americas and allegion international. we sell a wide range of security products and solutions for end-users in commercial, institutional and residential facilities worldwide, including the education, healthcare, government, hospitality, retail, commercial office and single and multi-family residential markets. our leading brands include cisa, interflex, lcn, schlage, simonsvoss and von duprin. recent developments industry trends and outlook throughout 2022 we experienced strong demand for our non-residential products and services in our allegion americas segment. our ability to meet this elevated level of customer demand improved substantially as the year progressed, due in part to our actions taken to address industry-wide supply-chain challenges (particularly shortages of electronic components), as well as improving availability of non-electronic parts and materials. further, in response to the persistent, elevated levels of inflation seen throughout the year, we implemented a series of pricing initiatives across our global businesses. not only did these pricing initiatives significantly contribute to revenue growth in 2022, they also helped mitigate the inflationary pressures on our cost base. we expect this pricing momentum to continue to drive revenue growth and help offset the impact of inflation into 2023. while 2022 began with similar strong demand for our residential products in our allegion americas segment, macroeconomic conditions had a more challenging impact on demand as the year progressed. a combination of elevated inflation and lower consumer sentiment impacted sales volumes of residential products within our allegion americas segment. we also experienced a softening of demand throughout many of the eurozone economies during the second half of 2022, reflecting increased economic and geopolitical concerns in this region, which impacted several of our businesses in our allegion international segment. while supply chain challenges around the availability of electronic parts and components persist, and will likely continue to impact our ability to meet the elevated levels of demand for our electronic security products into 2023, we remain focused on providing exceptional service and innovation to our customers. over the course of 2022, we began to realize the benefits from our measures taken to mitigate operational and logistical inefficiencies caused by the supply chain challenges, such as re-engineering product designs and configurations to accept alternate electronic components and developing alternate sources of supply. we continue to invest in business initiatives to drive future growth and add value through seamless access and explore various options to enhance financial performance while minimizing disruption to customers and our overall business. the macroeconomic and geopolitical trends and uncertainties noted above will likely continue to affect us in numerous and evolving ways, the full impact of which on our business, financial condition and results of operations will continue to depend on future developments that are beyond our control and we may not be able to accurately predict. these trends and uncertainties and their potential impact on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows, as well as other risks, trends and uncertainties that could affect our business, financial condition and results of operations are described further under "part i, item 1a. risk factors". 2022 and 2021 significant events acquisition of the access technologies business on july 5, 2022, we completed the acquisition of the access technologies business for a closing purchase price of $923.1 million. this acquisition was financed by the net proceeds from the issuance of our 5.411% senior notes, together with borrowings under the 2021 revolving facility. the access technologies business has been integrated into our allegion americas segment the access technologies business is a leading manufacturer, installer and service provider of automatic entrance solutions in north america, primarily in the u.s. and canada. its diversified customer base centers on non-residential settings, including retail, healthcare, education, commercial offices, hospitality and government. this acquisition helps us create a more comprehensive portfolio of access solutions, with the addition of automated entrance solutions. additionally, the access technologies business adds an expansive service and support network throughout the u.s. and canada, broadening our solutions to national, regional and local customers, and complementing our existing strengths in these non-residential markets. since the acquisition date and through december 31, 2022, the access technologies business generated $185.9 million in net revenues. divestiture of milre in september 2022, we sold milre systek co. ltd. ("milre") in south korea for an immaterial amount. as a result of the sale, we recorded a net loss on divestiture of $7.6 million. financing activities on june 22, 2022, allegion us holding company inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of the company ("allegion us hold co"), issued $600.0 million aggregate principal amount of its 5.411% senior notes due 2032 (the “5.411% senior notes”). the 5.411% senior notes require semi-annual interest payments on january 1 and july 1, beginning january 1, 2023, and will mature on july 1, 2032. we incurred and deferred $5.9 million of discounts and financing costs associated with the 5.411% senior notes, which will be amortized to interest expense over their 10-year term, as well as $4.3 million of third party financing costs that were recorded within interest expense on the consolidated statement of comprehensive income for the year ended december 31, 2022. on november 18, 2021, we entered into a new $750.0 million unsecured credit agreement, consisting of the $250.0 million 2021 term facility and the $500.0 million 2021 revolving facility. the proceeds of $250.0 million from the 2021 term facility were primarily used to repay in full our previously outstanding unsecured term facility. 2022 dividends and share repurchases we paid quarterly dividends of $0.41 per ordinary share to shareholders on record as of march 16, 2022, june 16, 2022, september 16, 2022, and december 16, 2022, for a total of $143.9 million and repurchased approximately 0.5 million ordinary shares for approximately $61.0 million during the year ended december 31, 2022. 30 results of operations - for the years ended december 31 dollar amounts in millions, except per share amounts2022% of net revenues 2021% of net revenues net revenues$3,271.9 $2,867.4 cost of goods sold1,949.5 59.6 %1,662.5 58.0 % selling and administrative expenses736.0 22.5 %674.7 23.5 % operating income586.4 17.9 %530.2 18.5 % interest expense75.9 50.2 loss on divestitures7.6 — other income, net(11.6) (44.0) earnings before income taxes514.5 524.0 provision for income taxes56.2 40.7 net earnings458.3 483.3 less: net earnings attributable to noncontrolling interests0.3 0.3 net earnings attributable to allegion plc$458.0 $483.0 diluted net earnings per ordinary share attributable to allegion plc ordinary shareholders:$5.19 $5.34 the discussions that follow describe the significant factors contributing to the changes in our results of operations for the years presented and form the basis used by management to evaluate the financial performance of the business. for a discussion of our results of operations for the year ended december 31, 2021, compared to the year ended december 31, 2020, see “part ii, item 7. management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations” of our 2021 annual report on form 10-k filed with the sec on february 15, 2022. net revenues net revenues for the year ended december 31, 2022, increased by 14.1%, or $404.5 million, as compared to the year ended december 31, 2021, due to the following: pricing9.8 % volume0.9 % acquisitions / divestitures6.4 % currency exchange rates(3.0)% total14.1 % the increase in net revenues was driven by improved pricing across our major businesses, our acquisition of the access technologies business and higher volumes in our allegion americas segment. these increases were partially offset by unfavorable foreign currency exchange rate movements, lower volumes in our allegion international segment and a divestiture in each of the prior and current year. increased pricing was the result of multiple pricing initiatives implemented to help mitigate the impact of the persistent, elevated levels of inflation. we will continue to monitor the inflationary pressures to our businesses and address them through pricing initiatives where appropriate. pricing includes increases or decreases of price, including discounts, surcharges and/or other sales deductions, on our existing products and services. volume includes increases or decreases of revenue due to changes in unit volume of existing products and services, as well as new products and services. cost of goods sold for the year ended december 31, 2022, cost of goods sold as a percentage of net revenues increased to 59.6% from 58.0%, as compared to the year ended december 31, 2021, due to the following: inflation in excess of pricing and productivity0.7 % volume / product mix(0.9)% acquisitions / divestitures0.7 % investment spending0.2 % currency exchange rates0.3 % restructuring / acquisition expenses0.6 % total1.6 % 31 cost of goods sold as a percentage of net revenues increased primarily due to the impact inflation had on cost of goods sold, which exceeded the beneficial impacts from pricing and productivity, lower gross margins associated with our acquired access technologies business, increased investment spending, higher restructuring and acquisition and integration costs year-over-year and unfavorable foreign currency exchange rate movements. these increases to cost of goods sold as a percentage of net revenues were partially offset by favorable product mix, due to increased volumes in the allegion americas segment. inflation in excess of pricing and productivity includes the impact to costs of goods sold from pricing, as defined above, in addition to productivity and inflation. productivity represents improvements in unit costs of materials and cost reductions related to improvements to our manufacturing design and processes. inflation includes unit costs for the current period compared to the average actual cost for the prior period, multiplied by current year volumes. volume/product mix represents the impact due to increases or decreases of revenue due to changes in unit volume, including new products and services, including the effect of changes in the mix of products and services sold on cost of goods sold. selling and administrative expenses for the year ended december 31, 2022, selling and administrative expenses as a percentage of net revenues decreased to 22.5% from 23.5%, as compared to the year ended december 31, 2021, due to the following: productivity in excess of inflation(1.5)% volume leverage(0.2)% acquisitions / divestitures(0.3)% investment spending0.3 % restructuring / acquisition expenses0.7 % total(1.0)% selling and administrative expenses as a percentage of net revenues decreased primarily due to productivity improvements exceeding the impact of inflation, as well as favorable volume leverage and the beneficial impact from current and prior year acquisition and divestiture activity. these decreases were partially offset by a year-over-year increase in acquisition and integration expenses, which were primarily related to our acquisition of the access technologies business, and increased investment spending. productivity in excess of inflation includes the impact from reductions in selling and administrative expenses due to productivity projects and current period costs of ongoing selling and administrative functions compared to the same ongoing expenses in the prior period. volume leverage represents the contribution margin related to changes in sales volume, excluding the impact of price, productivity, mix and inflation. expenses related to increased head count for strategic initiatives, new facilities or significant spending for strategic initiatives or new product and channel development, are captured in investment spending in the table above. operating income/margin operating income for the year ended december 31, 2022, increased $56.2 million as compared to the year ended december 31, 2021, and operating margin decreased to 17.9% from 18.5%, due to the following: in millionsoperating incomeoperating margin december 31, 2021$530.2 18.5 % pricing and productivity in excess of inflation79.7 0.9 % volume / product mix36.5 1.1 % currency exchange rates(21.9)(0.2)% investment spending(16.0)(0.6)% acquisitions/ divestitures18.6 (0.4)% restructuring / acquisition expenses(40.7)(1.4)% december 31, 2022$586.4 17.9 % the increase in operating income was driven by pricing improvements in excess of inflation and productivity, favorable volume/product mix and the contribution to operating income from our acquired access technologies business. these increases were partially offset by unfavorable foreign currency exchange rate movements, increased investment spending and a year-over-year increase in restructuring and acquisition and integration expenses, which were primarily related to our acquisition of the access technologies business. the decrease in operating margin was primarily due to the year-over-year increase in restructuring and acquisition expenses, unfavorable foreign currency exchange rate movements, increased investment spending and the dilutive impact to operating 32 margin from our access technologies business. these decreases were partially offset by pricing improvements in excess of inflation and productivity, favorable volume/product mix and the positive impact to operating margin from recent divestitures. interest expense interest expense for the year ended december 31, 2022, increased $25.7 million as compared to the year ended december 31, 2021, primarily due to interest on our 5.411% senior notes and the 2021 revolving facility, as well as $4.3 million of third-party costs related to the financing of the access technologies business acquisition. the rise in interest rates over the course of 2022 also contributed to a higher weighted-average interest rate on our variable rate outstanding indebtedness. loss on divestiture as discussed above, in september 2022 we sold milre for an immaterial amount, resulting in a net loss of $7.6 million. other income, net the components of other income, net, for the years ended december 31 were as follows: in millions20222021 interest income$(1.3)$(0.4) foreign currency exchange loss2.4 2.7 earnings and gains from the sale of equity method investments, net(0.8)(6.4) net periodic pension and postretirement benefit income, less service cost(9.4)(7.1) other(2.5)(32.8) other income, net$(11.6)$(44.0) for the year ended december 31, 2022, other income, net decreased $32.4 million compared to 2021, primarily due to a non-operating investment gain of $20.7 in 2021 that did not recur in 2022. this gain is included within other in the table above. also contributing to the decrease in other income, net, are a prior year gain of $6.4 million from the sale of an equity method investment that did not recur in 2022 and a decrease in other realized and unrealized investment gains year-over-year. provision for income taxes for the year ended december 31, 2022, our effective tax rate was 10.9%, compared to 7.8% for the year ended december 31, 2021. the increase in the effective tax rate was primarily due to the favorable resolutions of uncertain tax positions, changes in jurisdictional tax rates and other discrete tax benefits in 2021 that have not recurred in 2022 and the mix of income earned in higher tax rate jurisdictions. review of business segments we operate in and report financial results for two segments: allegion americas and allegion international. these segments represent the level at which our chief operating decision maker reviews our financial performance and makes operating decisions. segment operating income is the measure of profit and loss that our chief operating decision maker uses to evaluate the financial performance of the business and as the basis for resource allocation, performance reviews and compensation. for these reasons, we believe segment operating income represents the most relevant measure of segment profit and loss. our chief operating decision maker may exclude certain charges or gains, such as corporate charges and other special charges, to arrive at a segment operating income that is a more meaningful measure of profit and loss upon which to base our operating decisions. we define segment operating margin as segment operating income as a percentage of the segment's net revenues. 33 segment results of operations - for the years ended december 31 in millions20222021% change net revenues allegion americas$2,551.6 $2,072.2 23.1 % allegion international720.3 795.2 (9.4)% total$3,271.9 $2,867.4 segment operating income allegion americas$613.3 $525.0 16.8 % allegion international68.3 82.4 (17.1)% total$681.6 $607.4 segment operating margin allegion americas24.0 %25.3 % allegion international9.5 %10.4 % allegion americas our allegion americas segment is a leading provider of security products, services and solutions throughout north america. the segment sells a broad range of products and solutions including, locks, locksets, portable locks, key systems, door controls and systems, exit devices, doors, accessories, electronic security products, access control systems and software and service solutions to customers in commercial, institutional and residential facilities, including the education, healthcare, government, hospitality, retail, commercial office and single and multi-family residential markets. this segment’s primary brands are lcn, schlage, von duprin and stanley access technologies, which we utilize with permission in accordance with the terms of the access technologies acquisition agreement ("stanley" is the property of stanley logistics l.l.c). net revenues net revenues for the year ended december 31, 2022, increased by 23.1%, or $479.4 million, as compared to the year ended december 31, 2021, due to the following: pricing11.4 % volume3.0 % acquisitions9.0 % currency exchange rates(0.3)% total23.1 % the increase in net revenues was driven by significantly improved pricing, higher volumes for our non-residential products and our access technologies business acquisition. these increases were partially offset by unfavorable foreign currency exchange rate movements and lower volumes for our residential products. increased pricing was the result of multiple pricing initiatives implemented to help mitigate the impact of persistent, elevated levels of inflation. we will continue to monitor the inflationary pressures to our businesses and address them through pricing initiatives where appropriate. net revenues from non-residential products (excluding net revenues from our acquired access technologies business), increased by a low twenties percent compared to the prior year, driven by improved pricing and higher volumes. strong demand throughout 2022 and improvements around the availability of materials and components, driven in part by our actions to mitigate these supply-chain challenges, helped drive the increase in volumes compared to 2021. net revenues from residential products decreased by a low single digits percent compared to the prior year. increased pricing was offset by lower volumes during the year. during the second half of 2022, we experienced a softening in market demand for our residential products, due in part to elevated inflation and lower consumer sentiment, which resulted in reduced sales volumes. further, market conditions for new residential construction deteriorated over the latter half of 2022, due in part to a rapid and substantial increase in mortgage rates. given these factors, we anticipate softness in demand for our residential products to continue into 2023. growth in electronic security products and solutions is a metric monitored by management and a focus of our investors. electronic products encompass both residential and non-residential products, and include all electrified product categories including, but not limited to, electronic and electrified locks, access control systems and electronic and electrified door controls and systems and exit devices. net revenues from the sale of electronic products increased by a high teens percent compared to 2021, driven by improved pricing and higher volumes. while we continue to experience delays and shortages of electronic components from key suppliers, we expect continued growth from the sale of electronic products in 2023 given the combination of our pricing initiatives and our actions taken to mitigate these delays and shortages. 34 operating income/margin segment operating income for the year ended december 31, 2022, increased $88.3 million, and segment operating margin decreased to 24.0% from 25.3% as compared to the year ended december 31, 2021, due to the following: in millionsoperating incomeoperating margin december 31, 2021$525.0 25.3 % pricing and productivity in excess of inflation57.1 — % volume / product mix52.2 1.7 % currency exchange rates(4.4)(0.1)% investment spending(10.4)(0.5)% acquisitions16.4 (1.3)% acquisition expenses(22.6)(1.1)% december 31, 2022$613.3 24.0 % the increase in segment operating income was primarily driven by pricing improvements in excess of inflation and productivity, favorable volume/product mix and the contribution to segment operating income from our acquired access technologies business. these increases were partially offset by unfavorable foreign currency exchange rate movements, increased investment spending and a year-over-year increase in acquisition and integration expenses, which were primarily related to our acquisition of the access technologies business. the decrease in segment operating margin was primarily due to the year-over-year increase in acquisition and integration expenses, the impact to segment operating margin from our access technologies business, increased investment spending and unfavorable foreign currency exchange rate movements. these decreases were partially offset by favorable volume/product mix. allegion international our allegion international segment provides security products, services and solutions primarily throughout europe, asia and oceania. the segment offers end-users a broad range of products, services and solutions including locks, locksets, portable locks, key systems, door controls and systems, exit devices, doors, electronic security products, access control systems, time and attendance and workforce productivity solutions, among other software and service solutions. this segment’s primary brands are axa, bricard, briton, cisa, gainsborough, interflex and simonsvoss. net revenues net revenues for the year ended december 31, 2022, decreased by 9.4%, or $74.9 million, as compared to the year ended december 31, 2021, due to the following: pricing5.6 % volume(4.6)% acquisitions / divestitures(0.3)% currency exchange rates(10.1)% total(9.4)% the decrease in net revenues was driven by lower volumes and unfavorable foreign currency exchange rate movements, due to the strengthening of the u.s. dollar relative to most of the currencies in which we do business throughout our allegion international segment. both a prior year and current year divestiture also contributed slightly to the decrease in net revenues. these decreases were partially offset by improved pricing. as discussed above, softening demand throughout much of the eurozone in 2022 has impacted several of our businesses in our allegion international segment. additionally, covid-19 related lockdowns in china throughout the year also contributed to lower volumes. while we anticipate pricing initiatives to continue to positively contribute to revenue growth in 2023, volume growth will likely continue to be tempered until prevailing macroeconomic and geopolitical conditions improve. operating income margin segment operating income for the year ended december 31, 2022, decreased $14.1 million, and segment operating margin decreased to 9.5% from 10.4% as compared to the year ended december 31, 2021, due to the following: 35 in millionsoperating incomeoperating margin december 31, 2021$82.4 10.4 % pricing and productivity in excess of inflation23.7 2.4 % volume / product mix(15.6)(1.5)% currency exchange rates(17.6)(1.3)% investment spending(5.5)(0.7)% acquisitions / divestitures2.1 0.3 % restructuring / acquisition expenses(1.2)(0.1)% december 31, 2022$68.3 9.5 % the decreases in segment operating income and segment operating margin were primarily driven by unfavorable volume/product mix, unfavorable foreign currency exchange rate movements, increased investment spending and a year-over-year increase in restructuring and acquisition expenses. these decreases were partially offset by pricing and productivity improvements in excess of inflation and both prior year and current year acquisition and divestiture activity. liquidity and capital resources liquidity outlook, sources and uses our primary source of liquidity is cash provided by operating activities. cash provided by operating activities is used to invest in new product development and fund capital expenditures and working capital requirements. our ability to generate cash from our operating activities, our unused availability under the 2021 revolving facility and our access to the capital and credit markets enable us to fund these capital needs, execute our long-term growth strategies and return value to our shareholders. further, our business operates with strong operating cash flows, low leverage and low capital intensity, providing financial flexibility, including sufficient access to credit markets. our short-term financing needs primarily consist of working capital requirements, restructuring initiatives, capital spending, dividend payments and principal and interest payments on our long-term debt. long-term financing needs depend largely on potential growth opportunities, including potential acquisitions, repayment or refinancing of our long-term obligations and repurchases of our ordinary shares. of our total outstanding indebtedness as of december 31, 2022, approximately 85% incurs fixed-rate interest and is therefore not exposed to the risk of rising variable interest rates. based upon our operations, existing cash balances and unused availability under the 2021 revolving facility, as of december 31, 2022, we expect cash flows from operations to be sufficient to maintain a sound financial position and liquidity and to meet our financing needs for at least the next 12 months. further, we do not anticipate any covenant compliance challenges with any of our outstanding indebtedness for at least the next 12 months. we also believe existing availability under the 2021 credit facilities and access to credit and capital markets are sufficient to achieve our longer-term strategic plans. the following table reflects the major categories of cash flows for the years ended december 31. for additional details, see the consolidated statements of cash flows in the consolidated financial statements. in millions20222021 net cash provided by operating activities$459.5 $488.6 net cash used in investing activities(994.1)(31.6) net cash provided by (used in) financing activities$437.0 $(529.3) operating activities: net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended december 31, 2022, decreased by $29.1 million compared to 2021, driven primarily by changes in working capital. investing activities: net cash used in investing activities for the year ended december 31, 2022, increased by $962.5 million compared to 2021, primarily due to $923.1 million of cash paid for our acquisition of the access technologies business, as well as an increase of $18.6 million in capital expenditures compared to 2021. financing activities: net cash provided by (used in) financing activities for the year ended december 31, 2022, changed by $966.3 million compared to 2021, primarily due to the $600.0 million issuance of our 5.411% senior notes to help finance the acquisition of the access technologies business. additionally, cash used to repurchase shares was $351.8 million lower in 2022 compared to 2021. 36 capitalization at december 31, long-term debt and other borrowings consisted of the following: in millions20222021 2021 term facility$237.5 $250.0 2021 revolving facility69.0 — 3.200% senior notes due 2024400.0 400.0 3.550% senior notes due 2027400.0 400.0 3.500% senior notes due 2029400.0 400.0 5.411% senior notes due 2032600.0 — other debt0.2 0.3 total borrowings outstanding2,106.7 1,450.3 discounts and debt issuance costs, net(12.2)(8.2) total debt2,094.5 1,442.1 less current portion of long-term debt12.6 12.6 total long-term debt$2,081.9 $1,429.5 as of december 31, 2022, we have an unsecured credit agreement in place, consisting of the $250.0 million 2021 term facility, of which $237.5 million was outstanding at december 31, 2022, and the 2021 revolving facility (together with the 2021 term facility, the “2021 credit facilities”). the 2021 credit facilities mature on november 18, 2026. the 2021 term facility will amortize in quarterly installments at the following rates: 1.25% per quarter starting march 31, 2022 through march 31, 2025, 2.5% per quarter starting june 30, 2025 through september 30, 2026, with the balance due on november 18, 2026. principal amounts repaid on the term facility may not be reborrowed. the 2021 revolving facility provides aggregate commitments of up to $500.0 million, which includes up to $100.0 million for the issuance of letters of credit. on july 1, 2022, we borrowed $340.0 million under the 2021 revolving facility to partially fund our acquisition of the access technologies business. we subsequently repaid $271.0 million, resulting in $69.0 million of borrowings outstanding on the 2021 revolving facility as of december 31, 2022. we also had $13.2 million of letters of credit outstanding as of december 31, 2022. outstanding borrowings under the 2021 revolving facility may be repaid at any time without premium or penalty, and amounts repaid may be reborrowed. outstanding borrowings under the 2021 credit facilities accrue interest at our option of (i) a bloomberg short-term bank yield index (“bsby”) rate plus an applicable margin, or (ii) a base rate (as defined in the credit agreement) plus an applicable margin. the applicable margin ranges from 0.875% to 1.375% depending on our credit ratings. at december 31, 2022, outstanding borrowings under the 2021 credit facilities accrued interest at bsby plus a margin of 1.125%, resulting in an interest rate of 5.498%. the credit agreement also contains negative and affirmative covenants and events of default that, among other things, limit or restrict our ability to enter into certain transactions. in addition, the credit agreement requires us to comply with a maximum leverage ratio as defined within the agreement. as of december 31, 2022, our leverage ratio of approximately 2.5 was significantly below the covenant requirement, and we do not anticipate any potential concerns for at least the next 12 months. on june 22, 2022, we issued $600.0 million aggregate principal amount of 5.411% senior notes due 2032 (the “5.411% senior notes”). the 5.411% senior notes require semi-annual interest payments on january 1 and july 1, beginning january 1, 2023, and will mature on july 1, 2032. we incurred and deferred $5.9 million of discounts and financing costs associated with the 5.411% senior notes, which will be amortized to interest expense over their 10-year term, as well as $4.3 million of third party financing costs that were recorded within interest expense. as of december 31, 2022, we also have $400.0 million outstanding of 3.200% senior notes due 2024 (the “3.200% senior notes”), $400.0 million outstanding of 3.550% senior notes due 2027 (the “3.550% senior notes”) and $400.0 million outstanding of 3.500% senior notes due 2029 (the “3.500% senior notes”, and all four senior notes collectively, the "senior notes"). the 3.200% senior notes, 3.550% senior notes and 3.500% senior notes all require semi-annual interest payments on april 1 and october 1 of each year, and will mature on october 1, 2024, october 1, 2027, and october 1, 2029, respectively. historically, the majority of our earnings were considered to be permanently reinvested in jurisdictions where we have made, and intend to continue to make, substantial investments to support the ongoing development and growth of our global operations. at december 31, 2022, we analyzed our working capital requirements and the potential tax liabilities that would be incurred if certain subsidiaries made distributions and concluded that no material changes to our historic permanent reinvestment assertions were required. scheduled future principal repayments on our outstanding indebtedness can be found in note 9 to the consolidated financial statements. expected principal and interest payments related to our long-term indebtedness in 2023 amount to $12.6 million and $90.9 million, respectively, given our current level of indebtedness and effective interest rates as of december 31, 2022. 37 contractual obligations and other commitments in addition to the scheduled principal and interest payments discussed above, our material cash requirements include the following contractual and other obligations: purchase commitments – we occasionally enter into short-term, firm purchase commitments to mitigate pricing risk related to certain of our commodity, parts and component purchases, which represent commitments under enforceable and legally binding agreements. such purchase commitments are made in the normal course of business and are not anticipated to materially impact our liquidity or financial position over the next 12 months. leases – we have numerous real estate and equipment leasing arrangements for which we are a lessee. see note 11 to the consolidated financial statements for further information as to the short and long-term lease liabilities included within the consolidated balance sheets, as well as future minimum lease payments for 2023 and future years. defined benefit plans – our investment objective in managing defined benefit plan assets is to ensure that all present and future benefit obligations are met as they come due. we seek to achieve this goal while trying to mitigate volatility in plan funded status, contributions and expense by better matching the characteristics of the plan assets to that of the plan liabilities. global asset allocation decisions are based on a dynamic approach whereby a plan's allocation to fixed income assets increases as the funded status increases. we monitor plan funded status, asset allocation and the impact of market conditions on our defined benefit plans regularly in addition to investment manager performance. none of our defined benefit plans have experienced a significant impact on their liquidity due to volatility in the markets. at december 31, 2022, we had net pension liabilities of $12.1 million, which consist of plan assets of $490.7 million and benefit obligations of $502.8 million. it is our objective to contribute to our pension plans in order to ensure adequate funds are available to make benefit payments to plan participants and beneficiaries when required. at december 31, 2022, the funded status of our u.s. pension plans increased to 97.8% from 97.2% at december 31, 2021. the funded status for our non-u.s. pension plans decreased to 97.4% at december 31, 2022 from 107.7% at december 31, 2021. the funded status for all of our pension plans at december 31, 2022 decreased to 97.6% from 103.0% at december 31, 2021. we currently expect to contribute approximately $12 million to our plans worldwide in 2023. determining the costs and obligations associated with our defined benefit plans is dependent on various actuarial assumptions including discount rates, expected returns on plan assets, employee mortality and turnover rates. changes in any of the assumptions can have an impact on the net periodic pension benefit cost. an estimated 0.5% rate decline in the discount rate would have increased net periodic pension benefit cost by approximately $0.6 million in 2022, while a 0.5% rate decline in the estimated return on assets would have increased net periodic pension benefit cost by approximately $2.4 million. for further details on defined benefit plan activity, see note 12 to the consolidated financial statements. income taxes – at december 31, 2022, we have total unrecognized tax benefits for uncertain tax positions of $45.2 million and $11.0 million of related accrued interest and penalties, net of tax, although we are unable to reasonably estimate the timing over which these liabilities might be paid. see note 18 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding matters relating to income taxes, including unrecognized tax benefits and tax authority disputes. contingent liabilities – we are involved in various litigation, claims and administrative proceedings, including those related to environmental, asbestos-related and product liability matters. we believe that these liabilities are subject to the uncertainties inherent in estimating future costs for contingent liabilities and will likely be resolved over an extended period of time. see note 21 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information. guarantor financial information allegion us hold co is the issuer of the 3.200% senior notes, 3.550% senior notes and 5.411% senior notes and is the guarantor of the 3.500% senior notes. allegion plc (the “parent”) is the issuer of the 3.500% senior notes and is the guarantor of the 3.200% senior notes, 3.550% senior notes and 5.411% senior notes. allegion us hold co is directly or indirectly 100% owned by the parent and each of the guarantees of allegion us hold co and the parent is full and unconditional and joint and several. the 3.200% senior notes, 3.550% senior notes and 5.411% senior notes are senior unsecured obligations of allegion us hold co and rank equally with all of allegion us hold co’s existing and future senior unsecured and unsubordinated indebtedness. the guarantee of the 3.200% senior notes, 3.550% senior notes and 5.411% senior notes is the senior unsecured obligation of the parent and ranks equally with all of the parent’s existing and future senior unsecured and unsubordinated indebtedness. the 3.500% senior notes are senior unsecured obligations of the parent and rank equally with all of the parent’s existing and future senior unsecured and unsubordinated indebtedness. the guarantee of the 3.500% senior notes is the senior unsecured obligation of allegion us hold co and ranks equally with all of allegion us hold co's existing and future senior unsecured and unsubordinated indebtedness. each guarantee is effectively subordinated to any secured indebtedness of the guarantor to the extent of the value of the assets securing such indebtedness. the senior notes are structurally subordinated to indebtedness and other liabilities of the 38 subsidiaries of the guarantor, none of which guarantee the notes. the obligations of the guarantor under its guarantee are limited as necessary to prevent such guarantee from constituting a fraudulent conveyance under applicable law and, therefore, are limited to the amount that the guarantor could guarantee without such guarantee constituting a fraudulent conveyance; this limitation, however, may not be effective to prevent such guarantee from constituting a fraudulent conveyance. if the guarantee was rendered voidable, it could be subordinated by a court to all other indebtedness (including guarantees and other contingent liabilities) of the guarantor, and, depending on the amount of such indebtedness, the guarantor’s liability on its guarantee could be reduced to zero. in such an event, the notes would be structurally subordinated to the indebtedness and other liabilities of the guarantor. for further details, terms and conditions of the senior notes refer to the company’s forms 8-k filed october 2, 2017, september 27, 2019, and june 22, 2022. the following tables present the summarized financial information specified in rule 1-02(bb)(1) of regulation s-x for each issuer and guarantor. the summarized financial information has been prepared in accordance with rule 13-01 of regulation s-x. selected condensed statement of comprehensive income information year ended december 31, 2022 in millionsallegion plcallegion us hold co net revenues$— $— gross profit— — operating loss(6.7)(14.4) equity earnings in affiliates, net of tax505.9 195.5 transactions with related parties and subsidiaries(a) (21.1)(79.6) net earnings458.0 85.0 net earnings attributable to the entity458.0 85.0 (a) transactions with related parties and subsidiaries include intercompany interest and fees. selected condensed balance sheet information december 31, 2022 in millionsallegion plcallegion us hold co current assets: amounts due from related parties and subsidiaries$— $380.2 total current assets3.3 417.4 noncurrent assets: amounts due from related parties and subsidiaries— 1,523.9 total noncurrent assets1,792.6 1,596.6 current liabilities: amounts due to related parties and subsidiaries$45.9 $278.8 total current liabilities65.3 303.5 noncurrent liabilities: amounts due to related parties and subsidiaries659.5 2,694.5 total noncurrent liabilities1,282.0 4,166.1 critical accounting estimates management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with gaap. the preparation of financial statements in accordance with gaap requires management to use judgment in making estimates and assumptions based on the relevant information available at the end of each period. these estimates and assumptions have a significant effect on reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses as well as the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities because they result primarily from the need to make estimates and assumptions on matters that are inherently uncertain. actual results may differ from estimates. if updated information or actual amounts are different from previous estimates, the revisions are included in our results for the period in which they become known. the following is a summary of certain accounting estimates and assumptions made by management that we consider critical: •goodwill – goodwill is tested annually during the fourth quarter for impairment or when there is a significant change in events or circumstances that indicate the fair value of a reporting unit is, more likely than not, less than its carrying 39 amount. recoverability of goodwill is measured at the reporting unit level and starts with a comparison of the carrying amount of a reporting unit to its estimated fair value. if the estimated fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, goodwill of the reporting unit is not impaired. to the extent that the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its estimated fair value, a goodwill impairment charge will be recognized for the amount by which the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, not to exceed the carrying amount of the reporting unit's goodwill. as quoted market prices are not available for our reporting units, the calculation of their estimated fair values is based on two valuation techniques, a discounted cash flow model (income approach) and a market multiple of earnings (market approach), with each method being weighted in the calculation. the income approach relies on our estimates of revenue growth rates, margin assumptions and discount rates to estimate future cash flows and explicitly addresses factors such as timing, with due consideration given to forecasting risk. these assumptions are subject to varying degrees of judgment and complexity. estimates of future revenue growth rates and margin assumptions represent our best estimates of future cash flows given our expectations of market growth for the security products industry in the specific markets in which we operate, as well as factors such as our market positioning, brand strength, pricing and marketing efforts and other growth and productivity opportunities and initiatives. discount rate assumptions represent our best estimates of market participant adjusted weighted-average costs of capital. although these assumptions represent our best estimates as of the assessment date, certain factors could potentially create variances in these estimates, including, but not limited to: •decreases in estimated market sizes or market growth rates due to greater than expected declines in volumes, pricing pressures or disruptive technology; •declines in our market share and penetration assumptions due to increased competition or an inability to develop or launch new products; •the impacts of market volatility, including but not limited to, impacts of global pandemics, greater than expected inflation, supply chain disruption and delays, declines in pricing, reductions in volumes or fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates; •the level of success of on-going and future research and development efforts, including those related to acquisitions, and increases in the research and development costs necessary to obtain regulatory approvals and launch new products; and •volatility in market interest rates that could impact the selection of an appropriate discount rate. the market approach requires determining an appropriate peer group, which is utilized to derive estimated fair values of our reporting units based on selected market multiples. the market approach reflects the market’s expectations for future growth and risk, with adjustments to account for differences between the selected peer group companies and the subject reporting units. while market multiples are based on observable, arm’s-length evidence of value, these assumptions are still subject to inherent uncertainty, as the peer-group companies may differ in significant ways from one or more of our reporting units in terms of size, growth or business characteristics. the critical accounting estimates and assumptions discussed above, include our estimates of revenue growth rates and margin assumptions, discount rates, our selection of an appropriate peer group and selected market multiples. these estimates and assumptions are considered critical, as they are subject to a high degree of judgment and complexity. the selection of an applicable peer group has not significantly changed in recent years. forecasted revenue growth rates and margin assumptions are updated annually and often fluctuate from year to year due to a myriad of factors, such as our assessment of the macroeconomic conditions throughout the major markets in which we do business, navigating the covid-19 pandemic, supply chain challenges, elevated levels of inflation in recent years and pricing initiatives to offset inflation, market acceptance of new product innovation, investments in productivity projects, restructuring efforts, among other economic, strategic and operational factors impacting our businesses. discount rate and market multiple assumptions are similarly updated annually, based on our best estimates of market participants, which typically include observable, arm's length-evidence of value, where possible. while we make every effort to estimate fair value as accurately as possible with the information available at the assessment date, changes in assumptions and estimates may affect the estimated fair value of the reporting unit and could result in impairment charges in future periods. during our most recent annual impairment analysis, none of our reporting units were determined to be at risk of impairment. •indefinite-lived intangible assets – similar to goodwill, indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested annually during the fourth quarter for impairment or when there is a significant change in events or circumstances that indicate the fair value of the asset is, more likely than not, less than its carrying amount. recoverability of indefinite-lived intangible assets is determined on a relief from royalty methodology, which is based on the implied royalty paid, at an appropriate discount rate, to license the use of an asset rather than owning the asset. the present value of the after-tax cost savings (i.e. royalty relief) indicates the estimated fair value of the asset. any excess of the carrying value over the estimated fair value is recognized as an impairment loss equal to that excess. the critical assumptions utilized in our annual impairment analysis for indefinite-lived intangible assets are the royalty rates and discount rates, which often differ amongst our various indefinite-lived assets. we assess the appropriateness of each royalty rate assumption annually, based on our assessment of observable market royalty rates and an analysis of the profitability of the primary business that owns or otherwise uses the indefinite-lived asset. discount rate assumptions typically consider the discount rate conclusions for 40 the reporting unit in which an underlying business operates, plus an incremental spread, where appropriate, to consider size, country or other company-specific risk. a significant change in any or a combination of the assumptions used to estimate fair value of our indefinite-lived intangible assets could have a negative impact on the estimated fair values. •income taxes – we account for income taxes in accordance with asc topic 740. deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on temporary differences between financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, applying enacted tax rates expected to be in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. we recognize future tax benefits, such as net operating losses and non-u.s. tax credits, to the extent that realizing these benefits is considered in our judgment to be more likely than not. the recoverability of our deferred tax assets, which we consider to be a critical estimate, is reviewed regularly by considering our historic profitability, projected future taxable income, timing of the reversals of existing temporary differences and the feasibility of our tax planning strategies. where appropriate, we record a valuation allowance with respect to future tax benefits. we establish valuation allowances against the realizability of any deferred tax assets based on our consideration of all available evidence, both positive and negative, using a “more likely than not” standard. this assessment considers the nature, frequency and amount of recent losses, the duration of statutory carryforward periods and tax planning strategies. although our assessments of the valuation and recoverability of our deferred tax assets can change given a change in facts and circumstances (such as a change in a statutory tax rate), in making such judgments and estimates, significant weight is given to evidence that can be objectively verified. the provision for income taxes also involves a significant amount of management judgment regarding interpretation of relevant facts and laws in the jurisdictions in which we operate. future changes in applicable laws, projected levels of taxable income and tax planning could change the effective tax rate and tax balances recorded by us. in addition, tax authorities periodically review income tax returns filed by us and can raise issues regarding our filing positions, timing and amount of income or deductions and the allocation of income among the jurisdictions in which we operate. a significant period of time may elapse between the filing of an income tax return and the ultimate resolution of an issue raised by a tax authority with respect to that return. we believe we have adequately provided for any reasonably foreseeable resolution of these matters and will adjust our estimates if significant events so dictate. to the extent that the ultimate results differ from our original or adjusted estimates, the effect will be recorded in the provision for income taxes in the period the matter is finally resolved. •business combinations – the accounting for business combinations involves a considerable amount of judgment and estimation, including the identification of and fair values determined for acquired intangible assets, which typically include trade names, customer relationships and completed technologies. the determination of fair values of acquired intangible assets involves projections of future revenues and cash flows that are either discounted at an estimated discount rate or measured at an estimated royalty rate; fair values of other acquired assets and assumed liabilities, including potential contingencies; and the useful lives of the acquired assets. due to the level of judgment and estimation required, in the case of significant acquisitions, we normally obtain the assistance of a third-party valuation specialist in estimating fair values of acquired tangible and intangible assets and assumed liabilities. an income approach or market approach (or both) is utilized in accordance with accepted valuation models to determine fair value. the determination of fair value of acquired assets typically requires the use of assumptions that include projections developed using historical information, internal forecasts, available industry and market data, estimates of revenue growth rates, profitability, customer attrition and discount and royalty rates, which are estimated at the time of acquisition, considering the perspective of marketplace participants. while we believe expectations and assumptions utilized for historical business combinations have been reasonable, they are inherently uncertain, and unanticipated market or macroeconomic events and circumstances occasionally do occur, and may occur in the future, which could affect the accuracy and validity of such assumptions. for our acquisition of the access technologies business in 2022, we believe the critical assumptions that significantly impacted recorded amounts for identifiable intangible assets include the financial projections of future performance of the business, the royalty rate assumption utilized in determining the fair value of the finite-lived trade name asset and the allocation of revenues by customer type and attrition rate assumptions utilized in determining the fair value of the customer relationship asset. the royalty rate assumption utilized in the valuation of the trade name asset was determined based on a review of market royalty rates and an analysis of the access technologies business’ profitability. an increase or decrease of 1% in the royalty rate assumption would have resulted in an approximate $15 million change in the value ascribed to the trade name asset. the attrition rate assumption utilized in the valuation of the customer relationship asset was determined based on a detailed review of customer specific data for the access technologies business spanning multiple years, combined with our estimation of the likelihood of these trends continuing for the foreseeable future. an increase or decrease of 1% in the attrition rate assumption would have resulted in an approximate $15-20 million change in the value ascribed to the customer relationship asset. the impact of future business combinations on our financial condition or results of operations may also be materially impacted by the change in or initial selection of assumptions and estimates, in addition to events and circumstances 41 subsequent to the acquisition that are not reasonably anticipated when finalizing our purchase accounting estimates and assumptions. recent accounting pronouncements see note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in item 8 herein for a discussion of recently issued and adopted accounting pronouncements.