item 7. management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations ("md&a") should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements included in item 8. financial statements and supplementary data contained herein. for management's discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for fiscal year 2022 as compared to fiscal year 2021 please refer to part ii, item 7. "management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations" on form 10-k for our fiscal year ended december 31, 2022, filed with the securities and exchange commission ("sec") on february 14, 2023. executive summary we are an energy technology company with a broad and diversified portfolio of technologies and services that span the energy and industrial value chain. we operate through our two business segments: ofse and iet. we sell products and services primarily in the global oil and gas markets, within the upstream, midstream and downstream segments, as well as broader industrial and new energy markets. during 2023, baker hughes built strong momentum across the company with significant improvement in our financial results over 2022. in ofse, we saw key commercial successes and solid margin improvements, and in iet, we benefited from robust growth in lng orders, driving rpo to levels that provides meaningful revenue visibility. overall, we capitalized on market tailwinds to deliver strong revenue growth across both segments, began realizing the full benefits of our cost-out initiatives, and continued to transform how we operate. we also achieved significant growth in new energy orders compared to 2022 as we continue to experience growing demand for decarbonization solutions across the company's iet and ofse portfolios. as we look to 2024, we remain balanced on the oil and gas outlook but continue to see areas of strength across our portfolio despite persisting economic uncertainty. we continue to believe in a multiyear upstream spending cycle, which, we believe, will be more durable and less sensitive to commodity price swings relative to prior cycles and led by international and offshore markets. continued discipline from the world's largest producers and the pace of oil demand growth in the face of economic uncertainty, will remain important factors to monitor as we look into 2024. oil and gas prices have experienced volatility in the fourth quarter of 2023 and beginning of 2024, and this will likely have some influence on upstream development plans, particularly for shorter-cycle spending budgets. additionally, the conflict in the middle east has added another element of uncertainty across the oil and gas markets. while this conflict has not had a material impact on our operations, a further escalation in geopolitical tensions across the region could impact the company. we will continue to monitor and assess the impact of the conflict in the middle east on our business. furthermore, in iet, the aeroderivative supply chain continues to show signs of tightness, which we will continue to manage operationally. we also remain optimistic on the lng outlook, seeing a continued shift towards the development of natural gas and lng. as a result, the lng project pipeline remains strong, both in the u.s. and internationally. as the world increasingly recognizes the crucial role natural gas is expected to play in the energy transition, serving as both a transition and destination fuel, we believe it will be fundamental in satisfying the world's energy needs for many decades to come. financial results in 2023, the company generated revenue of $25.5 billion, compared to $21.2 billion in 2022, increasing $4.4 billion or 21%. the increase in revenue was primarily driven by higher volume in iet on gas technology equipment project backlog execution and stronger activity in ofse. income before tax was $2,655 million in 2023 compared to $22 million in 2022, increasing $2,633 million. the increase in income before tax was driven by higher volume and price in both segments and structural cost-out initiatives, positive effect from the change in fair value on certain equity securities, and lower restructuring and impairment charges. baker hughes company 2023 form 10-k | 32 our journey of transformation continues. the business has undertaken significant structural changes, and we see the cost-out performance coming through our operating results. we have made significant progress; however, there is still more work to do to further identify areas to simplify and create efficiencies and modernize how the business operates, including actions launched in ofse to remove duplication and further streamline the business. baker hughes remains committed to a flexible capital allocation policy that balances returning cash to shareholders and investing in growth opportunities. we increased our quarterly dividend in the third quarter of 2023 by one cent to $0.20 per share. for the full year of 2023, we returned a total of $1.3 billion to shareholders in the form of dividends and share repurchases. we continue to invest in the baker hughes portfolio through strategic acquisitions. in 2023, we completed the acquisition of altus intervention, a leading international provider of well intervention services and downhole technology, which significantly enhances ofse's existing portfolio. we also completed the sale of the nexus controls business in april 2023. outlook our business is exposed to a number of macro factors, which influence our outlook and expectations given the current volatile conditions in the industry. all of our outlook expectations are purely based on the market as we see it today and are subject to changing conditions in the industry. •ofse north america activity: after trending lower most of 2023 due to lower activity from private exploration & production operators and in gas basins, north american activity has recently stabilized. however, we see a slow start to 2024 and anticipate only a modest recovery in activity during the second half of 2024. •ofse international activity: we expect spending outside of north america to experience moderate growth in 2024, as compared to 2023. •iet lng projects: we remain optimistic on the lng market long-term and view natural gas as a transition and destination fuel. we continue to view the long-term economics of the lng industry as positive. we have other businesses in our portfolio that are more correlated with various industrial metrics, including global gdp growth. we also have businesses within our portfolio that are exposed to new energy solutions, specifically focused around reducing carbon emissions of the energy and broader industry, including hydrogen, geothermal, ccus, energy storage, clean power and emissions abatement solutions. we expect to see continued growth in these businesses as new energy solutions become a more prevalent part of the broader energy mix. overall, we believe our portfolio is well positioned to compete across the energy value chain and deliver comprehensive solutions for our customers. we remain optimistic about the long-term economics of the oil and gas industry, but we are continuing to operate with flexibility. over time, we believe the world's demand for energy will continue to rise, and that hydrocarbons will play a major role in meeting the world's energy needs for the foreseeable future. as such, we remain focused on delivering innovative, low-emission, and cost-effective solutions that deliver step changes in operating and economic performance for our customers. business environment the following discussion and analysis summarizes the significant factors affecting our results of operations, financial condition and liquidity position as of and for the years ended december 31, 2023 and 2022, and should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes of the company. our revenue is predominately generated from the sale of products and services to major, national, and independent oil and natural gas companies worldwide, and is dependent on spending by our customers for oil and natural gas exploration, field development and production. this spending is driven by a number of factors, including our customers' forecasts of future energy demand and supply, their access to resources to develop and produce oil and natural gas, their ability to fund their capital programs, the impact of new government regulations, and their expectations for oil and natural gas prices as a key driver of their cash flows. baker hughes company 2023 form 10-k | 33 oil and natural gas prices oil and natural gas prices are summarized in the table below as averages of the daily closing prices during each of the periods indicated. 20232022 brent oil prices ($/bbl) (1) $82.49 $100.93 wti oil prices ($/bbl) (2) 77.58 94.90 natural gas prices ($/mmbtu) (3) 2.53 6.45 (1)energy information administration ("eia") europe brent spot price per barrel (2)eia cushing, ok west texas intermediate ("wti") spot price (3)eia henry hub natural gas spot price per million british thermal unit outside north america, customer spending is influenced by brent oil prices. the average brent oil prices decreased to $82.49/bbl in 2023 from $100.93/bbl in 2022 and ranged from a low of $71.03/bbl in march 2023, to a high of $97.10/bbl in september 2023. in north america, customer spending is influenced by wti oil prices, which similarly to brent oil prices, on average decreased to $77.58/bbl in 2023 from $94.90/bbl in 2022, and ranged from a low of $66.61/bbl in march 2023, to a high of $93.67/bbl in september 2023. in north america, natural gas prices, as measured by the henry hub natural gas spot price, averaged $2.53/mmbtu in 2023, representing a 61% decrease over the prior year. throughout the year, henry hub natural gas spot prices ranged from a high of $3.78/mmbtu in january 2023, to a low of $1.74/mmbtu in june 2023. according to the u.s. department of energy, working natural gas in storage at the end of 2023 was 3,476 billion cubic feet ("bcf"), which was 20%, or 585 bcf, below the corresponding week in 2022. baker hughes rig count the baker hughes rig counts are an important business barometer for the drilling industry and its suppliers. when drilling rigs are active they consume products and services produced by the oil service industry. rig count trends are driven by the exploration and development spending by oil and natural gas companies, which in turn is influenced by current and future price expectations for oil and natural gas. the counts may reflect the relative strength and stability of energy prices and overall market activity; however, these counts should not be solely relied on as other specific and pervasive conditions may exist that affect overall energy prices and market activity. we have been providing rig counts to the public since 1944. we gather all relevant data through our field service personnel, who obtain the necessary data from routine visits to the various rigs, customers, contractors and other outside sources as necessary. we base the classification of a well as either oil or natural gas primarily upon filings made by operators in the relevant jurisdiction. this data is then compiled and distributed to various wire services and trade associations and is published on our website. we believe the counting process and resulting data is reliable; however, it is subject to our ability to obtain accurate and timely information. rig counts are compiled weekly for the u.s. and canada and monthly for all international rigs. published international rig counts do not include rigs drilling in certain locations, such as onshore china because this information is not readily available. rigs in the u.s. and canada are counted as active if, on the day the count is taken, the well being drilled has been started but drilling has not been completed and the well is anticipated to be of sufficient depth to be a potential consumer of our drill bits. in international areas, rigs are counted on a weekly basis and deemed active if drilling activities occurred during the majority of the week. the weekly results are then averaged for the month and published accordingly. the rig count does not include rigs that are in transit from one location to another, rigging up, being used in non-drilling activities including production testing, completion and workover, and are not expected to be significant consumers of drill bits. baker hughes company 2023 form 10-k | 34 the rig counts are summarized in the table below as averages for each of the periods indicated. 20232022 north america864 898 international948 851 worldwide1,812 1,749 2023 compared to 2022 the worldwide rig count was 1,812 in 2023, an increase of 4% as compared to 2022 primarily due to an increase in activity internationally partially offset by a decline in north america. the rig count in north america decreased 4% and the international rig count increased 11% in 2023 compared to 2022. within north america, the decrease was primarily driven by the u.s. rig count, which was down 5% on average when compared to the same period last year, partially offset by an increase in the canada rig count, which was up 1% on average. internationally, the increase in the rig count was driven by increases in the africa, europe, asia-pacific, middle east, and latin america regions of 24%, 22%, 11%, 8%, and 6%, respectively. results of operations the discussions below relating to significant line items from our consolidated statements of income (loss) are based on available information and represent our analysis of significant changes or events that impact the comparability of reported amounts. where appropriate, we have identified specific events and changes that affect comparability or trends and, where reasonably practicable, have quantified the impact of such items. in addition, the discussions below for revenue and cost of revenue are on a total basis as the business drivers for product sales and services are similar. all dollar amounts in tabulations in this section are in millions of dollars, unless otherwise stated. certain columns and rows may not add due to the use of rounded numbers. our results of operations are evaluated by the chief executive officer on a consolidated basis as well as at the segment level. the performance of our operating segments is primarily evaluated based on segment operating income (loss), which is defined as income (loss) before income taxes and before the following: net interest expense, net other non-operating income (loss), corporate expenses, restructuring, impairment and other charges, inventory impairments, and certain gains and losses not allocated to the operating segments. in evaluating the segment performance, the company primarily uses the following: volume: volume is defined as the increase or decrease in products and/or services sold period-over-period excluding the impact of foreign exchange and price. the volume impact on profit is calculated by multiplying the prior period profit rate by the change in revenue volume between the current and prior period. volume also includes price, which is defined as the change in sales price for a comparable product or service period-over-period and is calculated as the period-over-period change in sales prices of comparable products and services. foreign exchange ("fx"): fx measures the translational foreign exchange impact, or the translation impact of the period-over-period change on sales and costs directly attributable to change in the foreign exchange rate compared to the u.s. dollar. fx impact is calculated by multiplying the functional currency amounts (revenue or profit) with the period-over-period fx rate variance, using the average exchange rate for the respective period. (inflation)/deflation: (inflation)/deflation is defined as the increase or decrease in direct and indirect costs of the same type for an equal amount of volume. it is calculated as the year-over-year change in cost (i.e. price paid) of direct material, compensation and benefits, and overhead costs. productivity: productivity is measured by the remaining variance in profit, after adjusting for the period-over-period impact of volume and price, foreign exchange and (inflation)/deflation as defined above. improved or lower period-over-period cost productivity is the result of cost efficiencies or inefficiencies, such as cost decreasing or increasing more than volume, or cost increasing or decreasing less than volume, or changes in sales mix among segments. this also includes the period-over-period variance of transactional foreign exchange, aside from those foreign currency devaluations that are reported separately for business evaluation purposes. baker hughes company 2023 form 10-k | 35 orders and remaining performance obligations our consolidated statements of income (loss) displays sales and costs of sales in accordance with sec regulations under which "goods" is required to include all sales of tangible products and "services" must include all other sales, including other services activities. for the amounts shown below, we distinguish between "equipment" and "product services," where product services refers to sales under product services agreements, including sales of both goods (such as spare parts and equipment upgrades) and related services (such as monitoring, maintenance and repairs), which is an important part of our operations. we refer to "product services" simply as "services" within management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations. orders: we recognized orders of $30.5 billion and $26.8 billion in 2023 and 2022, respectively. we recognized ofse orders of $16.3 billion and $14.1 billion, and iet orders of $14.2 billion and $12.7 billion in 2023 and 2022, respectively. within iet, gas technology orders were $10.4 billion and $9.2 billion, industrial technology orders were $3.2 billion and $3.1 billion, and cts orders were $0.6 billion and $0.4 billion in 2023 and 2022, respectively. references to total new energy orders incorporates cts in iet of $0.6 billion and ofse of $0.2 billion. remaining performance obligations ("rpo"): as of december 31, 2023, the aggregate amount of the transaction price allocated to the unsatisfied (or partially unsatisfied) performance obligations was $33.5 billion. as of december 31, 2023, ofse remaining performance obligations totaled $3.5 billion, and iet remaining performance obligations totaled $29.9 billion. revenue and operating income summarized financial information for the company's segments is shown in the following tables. year ended december 31,$ change 20232022from 2022 to 2023 revenue: well construction$4,387 $3,854 $533 completions, intervention & measurements4,170 3,559 611 production solutions3,854 3,587 267 subsea & surface pressure systems2,950 2,230 720 oilfield services & equipment15,361 13,229 2,131 gas technology equipment 4,232 2,599 1,633 gas technology services 2,600 2,440 160 total gas technology6,832 5,039 1,793 industrial products 1,962 1,697 265 industrial solutions 983 884 99 controls (1) 41 208 (167) total industrial technology2,987 2,789 198 climate technology solutions 326 98 228 industrial & energy technology10,145 7,926 2,219 total$25,506 $21,156 $4,350 (1)the sale of our controls business was completed in april 2023. baker hughes company 2023 form 10-k | 36 the following table presents oilfield services & equipment revenue by geographic region: year ended december 31,$ change 20232022from 2022 to 2023 north america$4,116 $3,764 $352 latin america2,761 2,099 662 europe/cis/sub-saharan africa (1) 2,655 2,483 172 middle east/asia5,829 4,883 946 oilfield services & equipment$15,361 $13,229 $2,131 north america$4,116 $3,764 $352 international11,245 9,465 1,779 (1)impacted by the discontinuation of our russia operations that occurred in 2022. the following table presents segment operating income through to net income (loss) for the company. year ended december 31,$ change 20232022from 2022 to 2023 segment operating income: oilfield services & equipment$1,746 $1,201 $546 industrial & energy technology1,310 1,135 175 total segment operating income 3,055 2,336 719 corporate(380)(416)36 inventory impairment (1) (35)(31)(4) restructuring, impairment and other(323)(705)382 operating income2,317 1,185 1,133 other non-operating income (loss), net554 (911)1,464 interest expense, net(216)(252)36 income before income taxes2,655 22 2,633 provision for income taxes(685)(600)(85) net income (loss)$1,970 $(578)$2,547 (1)charges for inventory impairments are reported in "cost of goods sold" in the consolidated statements of income (loss). fiscal year 2023 to fiscal year 2022 revenue increased $4,350 million, or 21%, driven by increased activity across both segments. ofse increased $2,131 million and iet increased $2,219 million. total segment operating income increased $719 million, primarily driven by ofse and to a lesser extent iet. oilfield services & equipment ofse revenue of $15,361 million increased $2,131 million, or 16%, in 2023 compared to 2022, as a result of increased activity as evidenced by an increase in the global rig count. international revenue was $11,245 million in 2023, an increase of $1,779 million from 2022, primarily driven by the middle east/asia and latin america regions, partially offset by lower volume due to the discontinuation of our russia operations that occurred in 2022. north america revenue was $4,116 million in 2023, an increase of $352 million from 2022. ofse segment operating income was $1,746 million in 2023 compared to $1,201 million in 2022. the increase in operating income was primarily driven by higher volume, price and cost-out initiatives, partially offset by inflationary pressure and lower cost productivity. baker hughes company 2023 form 10-k | 37 industrial & energy technology iet revenue of $10,145 million increased $2,219 million, or 28%, in 2023 compared to 2022. the increase was primarily driven by higher volume in gas technology equipment and, to a lesser extent, in cts, industrial technology and gas technology services. iet segment operating income was $1,310 million in 2023 compared to $1,135 million in 2022. the operating income performance in 2023 was driven by higher volume, price and cost-out initiatives, partially offset by unfavorable business mix and cost productivity, inflationary pressure, and higher research and development costs related to new energy investments. corporate in 2023, corporate expenses were $380 million compared to $416 million in 2022. the decrease of $36 million was driven by savings related to our corporate optimization process. inventory impairment in 2023, we recorded inventory impairments of $35 million, predominately in the ofse segment related to exit activities at specific locations. in 2022, we recorded inventory impairments of $31 million, primarily in the iet segment as part of suspending our russia operations. charges for inventory impairments are reported in "cost of goods sold" in the consolidated statements of income (loss). restructuring, impairment and other in 2023, we recognized $323 million of restructuring, impairment, and other charges. we continued to incur charges in 2023 related to our plan initiated in 2022 that consisted primarily of employee termination expenses driven by actions taken to facilitate our reorganization into two segments and to optimize our corporate structure. restructuring charges for 2023 also include costs related to exit activities at specific locations in our segments to align with the current market outlook and to rationalize our manufacturing supply chain footprint. in the fourth quarter of 2023, we incurred additional costs related to a planned workforce reduction, primarily in ofse. in 2022, we recognized $705 million of restructuring, impairment, and other charges primarily related to the suspension of substantially all of our operations in russia, and the impairment of certain long-lived assets in the ofse segment for the subsea production systems business due to a decrease in the estimated future cash flows driven by a decline in our long-term market outlook for this business. other non-operating income (loss), net in 2023, we incurred $554 million of other non-operating income. included in this amount was a gain of $555 million from the change in fair value for certain equity investments. in 2022, we incurred $911 million of other non-operating losses primarily due to the loss of $451 million from the sale of part of the ofse business in russia and a loss of $265 million from the change in fair value for certain equity investments. additionally, in december 2022, the company, baker hughes holdings, llc ("bhh llc") and ge entered into an agreement which resulted in the termination of the tax matters agreement ("tma"), and as a result, we incurred a charge of $81 million, of which $21 million was a cash payment to ge as a net settlement of claims asserted under the tma. the tma governed the administration and allocation between the parties of tax liabilities and benefits arising prior to, as a result of, and subsequent to the merger in 2017, including the respective rights, responsibilities, and obligations of the parties with respect to various other tax matters. interest expense, net in 2023, we incurred net interest expense of $216 million, which includes interest income of $84 million. net interest expense decreased $36 million compared to 2022, primarily driven by higher interest income. baker hughes company 2023 form 10-k | 38 income taxes in 2023, the provision for income taxes was $685 million. the difference between the u.s. statutory tax rate of 21% and the effective tax rate is primarily related to income in jurisdictions with tax rates higher than in the u.s. and losses with no tax benefit due to valuation allowances, partially offset by income subject to u.s. tax at an effective rate less than 21% due to valuation allowances. in 2022, the provision for income taxes was $600 million. the difference between the u.s. statutory tax rate of 21% and the effective tax rate is primarily related to losses with no tax benefit due to valuation allowances, restructuring charges for which a majority has no tax benefit, and earnings in jurisdictions with tax rates higher than in the u.s. in 2021, as part of the organization for economic co-operation and development's ("oecd") inclusive framework, 140 member countries agreed to the implementation of the pillar two global minimum tax ("pillar two") of 15%. the oecd continues to release additional guidance, including administrative guidance on how pillar two rules should be interpreted and applied by jurisdictions as they adopt pillar two. a number of countries have utilized the administrative guidance as a starting point for legislation that is effective january 1, 2024. baker hughes is continuing to evaluate the potential impact on future periods of pillar two, pending legislative adoption by individual countries. compliance in the conduct of all of our activities, we are committed to maintaining the core values of our company, as well as high safety, ethical, and quality standards as also reported in our quality management system. we believe such a commitment is integral to running a sound, successful, and sustainable business. we devote significant resources to maintain a comprehensive global ethics and compliance program ("compliance program") which is designed to prevent, detect, and appropriately respond to any potential violations of the law, the code of conduct, and other company policies and procedures. highlights of our compliance program include the following: •comprehensive internal policies over such areas as anti-bribery; travel, entertainment, gifts and charitable donations to government officials and other parties; payments to commercial sales representatives; and, the use of non-u.s. police or military organizations for security purposes. in addition, there are policies and procedures to address customs requirements, visa processing risks, export and re-export controls, economic sanctions, anti-money laundering and anti-boycott laws. •global and independent structure of chief compliance officer and other compliance professionals providing compliance advice, customized training and governance, as well as investigating allegations across all regions and countries where we do business. •comprehensive employee compliance training program that combines instructor-led and web-based training modules tailored to the key risks that employees face on an ongoing basis. •due diligence and monitoring procedures for third parties who conduct business on our behalf, including channel partners (sales representatives, distributors, resellers), and administrative service providers. •due diligence procedures for acquisition activities. •specifically tailored compliance risk assessments and audits focused on country and third party risk. •compliance review board comprised of senior officers of the company that meets quarterly to monitor effectiveness of the compliance program, as well as segment compliance review boards that meet quarterly. •technology to monitor and report on compliance matters, including an internal investigations management system, a conflict of interest reporting and management system, a web-based anti-boycott reporting tool, global trade management systems and comprehensive watch list screening. baker hughes company 2023 form 10-k | 39 •data privacy compliance policies and procedures to ensure compliance with applicable data privacy requirements. •a compliance program designed to create an "open reporting environment" where employees are encouraged to report any ethics or compliance matter without fear of retaliation, including a global network of trained employee ombudspersons, and a worldwide, 24-hour business helpline operated by a third party and available in approximately 200 languages. •centralized finance organization with company-wide policies. •anti-corruption audits of high-risk countries, as well as risk-based compliance audits of third parties. •we have region-specific processes and procedures for management of hr related issues, including pre-hire screening of employees; a process to screen existing employees prior to promotion into select roles where they may be exposed to finance and/or corruption-related risks; and implementation of a global new hire training module which includes compliance training for all employees. liquidity and capital resources our objective in financing our business is to maintain sufficient liquidity, adequate financial resources, and financial flexibility in order to fund the requirements of our business. we continue to maintain solid financial strength and liquidity. at december 31, 2023, we had cash and cash equivalents of $2.6 billion compared to $2.5 billion at december 31, 2022. in the u.s. we held cash and cash equivalents of approximately $0.6 billion as of december 31, 2023 and 2022, and outside the u.s. of approximately $2.0 billion and $1.9 billion as of december 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. a substantial portion of the cash held outside the u.s. at december 31, 2023 has been reinvested in active non-u.s. business operations. if we decide at a later date to repatriate certain cash to the u.s., we may incur other additional taxes that would not be significant to the total tax provision. as of december 31, 2023 and 2022, we had $637 million and $605 million, respectively, of cash held in countries with currency controls that limit the flow of cash out of the jurisdiction or limit our ability to transfer funds without potentially incurring substantial costs. these funds are available to fund operations and growth in their respective jurisdictions, and we do not currently anticipate a need to transfer these funds to the u.s. in november 2023, bhh llc entered into a $3 billion committed unsecured revolving credit facility ("the new credit agreement") with commercial banks maturing in november 2028. the new credit agreement contains certain representations and warranties, certain affirmative covenants and negative covenants, in each case we consider customary. upon the occurrence of certain events of default, our obligations under the new credit agreement may be accelerated. such events of default include payment defaults to lenders under the new credit agreement and other customary defaults. no such events of default have occurred. the new credit agreement is fully and unconditionally guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by baker hughes. in addition, we have authorization to issue up to $3 billion of commercial paper. at december 31, 2023 and 2022, there were no borrowings under the new credit agreement and no outstanding commercial paper. certain senior notes contain covenants that restrict our ability to take certain actions. see "note 9. debt" of the notes to consolidated financial statements in this annual report for further details. at december 31, 2023, we were in compliance with all debt covenants. our next debt maturity is june 2024. we continuously review our liquidity and capital resources. if market conditions were to change, for instance due to the uncertainty created by geopolitical events, a global pandemic or a significant decline in oil and gas prices, and our revenue was reduced significantly or operating costs were to increase significantly, our cash flows and liquidity could be negatively impacted. additionally, it could cause the rating agencies to lower our credit ratings. there are no ratings triggers that would accelerate the maturity of any borrowings under our committed credit facility; however, a downgrade in our credit ratings could increase the cost of borrowings under the credit facility and could also limit or preclude our ability to issue commercial paper. should this occur, we could seek alternative sources of funding, including borrowing under the credit facility. baker hughes company 2023 form 10-k | 40 during the year ended december 31, 2023, we dispersed cash to fund a variety of activities including certain working capital needs, capital expenditures, business acquisitions, the payment of dividends, repayment of long-term debt, and repurchases of our common stock. cash flows cash flows provided by (used in) each type of activity were as follows for the years ended december 31: (in millions)20232022 operating activities$3,062 $1,888 investing activities(817)(1,564) financing activities(2,028)(1,592) operating activities cash flows from operating activities generated cash of $3,062 million and $1,888 million for the years ended december 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. our largest source of operating cash is payments from customers, of which the largest component is collecting cash related to our sales of products and services including advance payments or progress collections for work to be performed. the primary use of operating cash is to pay our suppliers, employees, tax authorities, and others for a wide range of goods and services. in 2023, cash generated from operating activities were primarily driven by net income adjusted for certain noncash items (including depreciation, amortization, gain on equity securities, stock-based compensation cost, deferred tax benefit, and the impairment of certain assets). net working capital cash generation was $42 million mainly due to strong progress collections on equipment contracts, mostly offset by an increase in receivables and inventory as we continue to build for growth. included in our 2023 cash flows from operating activities are payments of $142 million made primarily for employee severance as a result of our restructuring activities. in 2022, cash generated from operating activities were primarily driven by net losses adjusted for certain noncash items (including depreciation, amortization, loss on business dispositions, stock-based compensation cost, deferred tax provision, loss on equity securities, and the impairment of certain assets). working capital, which includes contract and other deferred assets, generated cash of $122 million in 2022 mainly due to strong progress collections on equipment contracts and an increase in accounts payable, partially offset by the increase in receivables and inventory as we build for revenue growth. investing activities cash flows from investing activities used cash of $817 million and $1,564 million for the years ended december 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. our principal recurring investing activity is the funding of capital expenditures including property, plant and equipment ("pp&e") and software, to support and generate revenue from operations. expenditures for capital assets were $1,224 million and $989 million for 2023 and 2022, respectively, partially offset by cash flows from the disposal of pp&e of $208 million and $217 million in 2023 and 2022, respectively. proceeds from the disposal of assets are primarily related to equipment that was lost-in-hole, predominantly in ofse, and pp&e no longer used in operations that was sold throughout the period. we had proceeds from the sale of certain equity securities of $372 million and $26 million in 2023 and 2022, respectively. in addition, in 2023, we completed the acquisition of businesses for total cash consideration of $301 million, net of cash acquired, which consisted primarily of the acquisition of altus intervention in the ofse segment. we also completed the sale of businesses and received total cash consideration of $293 million, which consisted primarily of the sale of our nexus controls business in the iet segment. the central bank of argentina maintains currency controls that limit our ability to access u.s. dollars and remit cash from our argentine operations. there is an indirect foreign exchange mechanism known as a blue chip swap baker hughes company 2023 form 10-k | 41 that enables companies to transfer u.s. dollars out of and into argentina, effectively at a parallel u.s. dollar exchange rate. in 2023, we entered into transactions in order to remit cash from our argentine operations resulting in a net loss and a net cash outflow of $66 million, which is included in other investing activities. in 2022, we completed the acquisition of businesses for total cash consideration of $767 million, net of cash acquired, including brush power generation, quest integrity, accessesp, and mosaic materials. financing activities cash flows from financing activities used cash of $2,028 million and $1,592 million for the years ended december 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. in 2023, we repaid long-term debt of $651 million primarily related to certain senior notes that matured in december. additionally, we increased our quarterly dividend by one cent to $0.20 per share during the third quarter of 2023. we paid dividends of $786 million and $726 million to our class a stockholders, and we made distributions of nil and $17 million to ge in 2023 and 2022, respectively. in 2023, we repurchased and canceled 16.3 million shares of class a common stock for a total of $538 million. in 2022, we repurchased and canceled 29.7 million shares of class a common stock for a total of $828 million. cash requirements we believe cash on hand, cash flows from operating activities, the available revolving credit facility, access to both commercial paper and our uncommitted lines of credit, and availability under our existing shelf registrations of debt will provide us with sufficient capital resources and liquidity in the short-term and long-term to manage our working capital needs, meet contractual obligations, fund capital expenditures and dividends, repay debt, repurchase our common stock, and support the development of our short-term and long-term operating strategies. our capital expenditures can be adjusted and managed by us to match market demand and activity levels. based on current market conditions, capital expenditures in 2024 will be made at a rate that we estimate would equal up to 5% of annual revenue. the expenditures are expected to be used primarily for normal, recurring items necessary to support our business. we also anticipate making income tax payments in the range of $800 million to $850 million in 2024. contractual obligations and commitments our material cash commitments from known contractual and other obligations consist primarily of obligations for long-term debt and related interest, leases for property and equipment, and purchase obligations as part of normal operations. certain amounts included in our contractual obligations as of december 31, 2023 are based on our estimates and assumptions about these obligations, including their duration, anticipated actions by third parties and other factors. see "note 9. debt" of the notes to consolidated financial statements in item 8 herein for information regarding scheduled maturities of our long-term debt. see "note 8. leases" of the notes to consolidated financial statements in item 8 herein for information regarding scheduled maturities of our operating leases. as of december 31, 2023, we had expected cash payments for estimated interest on our long-term debt and finance lease obligations of $253 million payable within the next twelve months and $2,687 million payable thereafter. as of december 31, 2023, we had purchase obligations of $1,871 million payable within the next twelve months and $875 million payable thereafter. our purchase obligations include expenditures for capital assets for 2024 as well as agreements to purchase goods or services or licenses that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify all significant terms, including: fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transaction. baker hughes company 2023 form 10-k | 42 due to the uncertainty with respect to the timing of potential future cash outflows associated with our uncertain tax positions, we are unable to make reasonable estimates of the period of cash settlement, if any, to the respective taxing authorities. therefore, $629 million in uncertain tax positions, including interest and penalties, have been excluded from the contractual obligations discussed above. see "note 11. income taxes" of the notes to consolidated financial statements in item 8 herein for further information. other factors affecting liquidity registration statement: in december 2023, baker hughes, together with bhh llc and baker hughes co-obligor, inc. filed a universal automatic shelf registration statement on form s-3asr with the sec to have the ability to sell various types of securities including debt securities, class a common stock, preferred stock, guarantees of debt securities, purchase contracts and units. the specific terms of any securities to be sold will be described in supplemental filings with the sec. the registration statement will expire in december 2026. customer receivables: in line with industry practice, we may bill our customers for services provided in arrears dependent upon contractual terms. in a challenging economic environment, we may experience delays in the payment of our invoices due to customers' lower cash flow from operations or their more limited access to credit markets. while historically there have not been material non-payment events, we attempt to mitigate this risk through working with our customers to restructure their debts. a customer's failure or delay in payment could have a material adverse effect on our short-term liquidity and results of operations. as of december 31, 2023, 19% of our gross customer receivables were from customers in the u.s. and 11% were from customers in mexico. as of december 31, 2022, 15% of our gross customer receivables were from customers in the u.s. and 11% were from customers in mexico. no other country accounted for more than 10% of our gross customer receivables at this date. international operations: our cash that is held outside the u.s. is 75% of the total cash balance as of december 31, 2023. depending on the jurisdiction or country where this cash is held, we may not be able to use this cash quickly and efficiently due to exchange or cash controls that could make it challenging. as a result, our cash balance may not represent our ability to quickly and efficiently use this cash. guarantor information baker hughes has senior unsecured notes and senior unsecured debentures (collectively the "debt securities") outstanding with an aggregate principal amount of $5,908 million as of december 31, 2023, with maturities ranging from 2024 to 2047. the debt securities constitute debt obligations of bhh llc, an indirect, 100% owned subsidiary and the primary operating company of baker hughes, and baker hughes co-obligor, inc, a 100%-owned finance subsidiary of bhh llc (the "issuers") that was incorporated for the sole purpose of serving as a corporate co-obligor of debt securities. the debt securities are fully and unconditionally guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by baker hughes and rank equally in right of payment with all of the company's other senior and unsecured debt obligations. as permitted under rule 13-01(a)(4)(vi) of regulation s-x, we have excluded summarized financial information for the issuers because the combined assets, liabilities, and results of operations of the issuers are not materially different than the corresponding amounts in baker hughes company's consolidated financial statements and management believes such summarized financial information would be repetitive and would not provide incremental value to investors. critical accounting estimates an accounting policy is deemed to be critical if the nature of the estimate or assumption it incorporates is subject to a material level of judgment related to matters that are highly uncertain and changes in those estimates and assumptions are reasonably likely to materially impact our consolidated financial statements. these estimates reflect our best judgment about current, and for some estimates, future, economic and market conditions and their potential effects based on information available as of the date of these financial statements. if these conditions change from those expected, it is reasonably possible that the judgments and estimates described below could change, which may result in future impairments of goodwill, or the establishment of valuation allowances on deferred tax assets and increased tax liabilities, among other effects. also, see "note 1. summary of significant baker hughes company 2023 form 10-k | 43 accounting policies" of the notes to consolidated financial statements in item 8 herein, which discusses our most significant accounting policies. the audit committee of the board has reviewed our critical accounting estimates and the disclosure presented below. during the past three fiscal years, we have not made any material changes in the methodology used to establish the critical accounting estimates, and we believe that the following are the critical accounting estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements for the year ended december 31, 2023. there are other items within our consolidated financial statements that require estimation and judgment, but they are not deemed critical as defined above. revenue recognition on long-term product services agreements we have long-term service agreements with our customers within our iet segment. these agreements typically require us to maintain assets sold to the customer over a defined contract term. these agreements have average contract terms of greater than 10 years. from time to time, these contract terms may be extended through contract modifications or amendments, which may result in revisions to future billing and cost estimates. revenue recognition on long-term product services agreements requires estimates of both customer payments and the costs to perform required maintenance services over the contract term. we recognize revenue on an over time basis using input method to measure our progress toward completion at the estimated margin rate of the contract. to develop our billings estimates, we consider the number of billable events that will occur based on estimated utilization of the asset under contract, over the life of the contract term. this estimated utilization will consider both historical and market conditions, asset retirements and new product introductions, if applicable. to develop our cost estimates, we consider the timing and extent of maintenance and overhaul events, including the amount and cost of labor, spare parts and other resources required to perform the services. in developing our cost estimates, we utilize a combination of our historical cost experience and expected cost improvements. cost improvements are only included in future cost estimates after savings have been observed in actual results or proven effective through an extensive regulatory or engineering approval process. we routinely review the estimates used in our product services agreements and regularly revise them to adjust for changes. these revisions are based on objectively verifiable information that is available at the time of the review. we gain insight into expected future utilization and cost trends, as well as credit risk, through our knowledge of the equipment installed and the close interaction with our customers through supplying critical services and parts over extended periods. revisions to cost or billing estimates may affect a product services agreement's total estimated profitability resulting in an adjustment of earnings; such adjustments generated earnings of $15 million, $20 million and $14 million for the three years ended december 31, 2023, 2022 and 2021, respectively. we provide for probable losses when they become evident. cash billings collected on these contracts were approximately $0.6 billion and $0.7 billion during the years ended december 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. our contracts (on average) are approximately 11% complete based on costs incurred to date and our estimate of future costs. revenue recognition on sale of customized equipment we recognize revenue on agreements for sales of equipment manufactured to unique customer specifications including long-term construction projects, on an over time basis utilizing cost inputs as the measurement criteria in assessing the progress toward completion. our estimation of the total costs required to fulfill our promise to a customer is generally based on our history of manufacturing similar assets for customers. this estimation of cost is critical to our revenue recognition process and is updated routinely to reflect changes in quantity or cost of the inputs. in certain projects, the underlying technology or promise to the customer is unique to what we have historically promised and reliably estimating the total cost to fulfill the promise to the customer requires a significant level of judgment. we provide for potential losses on any of these agreements when it is probable that we will incur the loss. the total revenue recognized for the sale of equipment on an over time basis during the twelve months ended december 31, 2023, 2022 and 2021 was $6.1 billion, $4.2 billion, and $4.8 billion, respectively. baker hughes company 2023 form 10-k | 44 goodwill and other long-lived assets we perform an annual impairment test of goodwill for each of our reporting units as of july 1, or more frequently when circumstances indicate an impairment may exist at the reporting unit level. when performing the annual impairment test, we have the option of first performing a qualitative assessment to determine the existence of events and circumstances that would lead to a determination that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is greater than its carrying amount. if, after assessing the existence of events and circumstances, we determine it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is greater than its carrying amount, there is no need to perform any further testing. however, if we conclude otherwise, we would be required to perform a quantitative impairment assessment of goodwill, which involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions and typically requires analysis of discounted cash flows and other market information, such as trading multiples, and comparable transactions. other long-lived assets, including property, plant and equipment and identifiable finite-lived intangible assets, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable and at least annually for indefinite-lived intangible assets. when testing for impairment, we group our long-lived assets with other assets and liabilities at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities. the determination of recoverability is made based upon the estimated undiscounted future net cash flows, which involves significant estimates and judgments on the part of management. the determination of whether goodwill and other long-lived assets are impaired involves a significant level of judgment and estimation, and changes in our forecasts, business strategy, government regulations, or economic or market conditions, among other things, could significantly impact these judgments, potentially decreasing the fair value of one or more reporting units or long-lived assets. any resulting impairment charges could have a material impact on our results of operations. income taxes our effective tax rate is based on our income, statutory tax rates, and differences between tax laws and u.s. gaap in various jurisdictions. tax laws are complex and subject to different interpretations by the taxpayer and respective governmental taxing authorities. our rate may be further impacted by the repatriation of foreign earnings that are considered indefinitely reinvested to the extent the repatriation would result in additional taxes such as withholding and income taxes. indefinite reinvestment is determined by management’s judgment and intentions concerning the future operations of the company. in cases where repatriation would otherwise incur significant withholding or income taxes, these foreign earnings have been indefinitely reinvested in active non-u.s. business operations. computation of the potential deferred tax liability associated with these undistributed earnings and any other basis differences is not practicable. deferred income tax assets represent amounts available to reduce income taxes payable in future years. when evaluating the recoverability of these deferred tax assets, all positive and negative evidence is analyzed including existing cumulative earnings or loss, forecasted taxable income from the reversal of taxable temporary differences, future forecasted operating earnings, and available tax planning strategies. the sources of this evidence rely heavily on estimates. hence, we use our historical experience and short and long range business forecasts to provide additional insight. we record a valuation allowance when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. further, a change to realizability of our deferred tax assets is recognized in the company's tax provision in the period in which the change occurs. our tax filings routinely are subject to audit by the tax authorities in the jurisdictions where we conduct business. these audits may result in assessments of additional taxes that are resolved with the tax authorities or through the courts. we have provided for the amounts we believe will ultimately result from these proceedings, but settlements of issues raised in these audits may affect our tax rate. we have $467 million of gross unrecognized tax benefits, excluding interest and penalties, at december 31, 2023. we are not able to reasonably estimate in which future periods these amounts ultimately will be settled. baker hughes company 2023 form 10-k | 45 allowance for credit losses the estimation of anticipated credit losses that may be incurred as we work through the invoice collection process with our customers requires us to make judgments and estimates regarding our customers' ability to pay amounts due to us. we monitor our customers' payment history and current credit worthiness to determine that collectability is reasonably assured. we also consider the overall business climate in which our customers operate. for accounts receivable, a loss allowance matrix is utilized to measure lifetime expected credit losses. the matrix contemplates historical credit losses by age of receivables, adjusted for any forward-looking information and management expectations. at december 31, 2023 and 2022, the allowance for credit losses totaled $350 million and $341 million of total gross accounts receivable, respectively. we believe that our allowance for credit losses is adequate to cover the anticipated credit losses under current conditions; however, uncertainties regarding changes in the financial condition of our customers, either adverse or positive, could impact the amount and timing of any additional credit losses that may be required. new accounting standards to be adopted see "note 1. summary of significant accounting policies" of the notes to consolidated financial statements in item 8 herein for further discussion of accounting standards to be adopted. related party transactions see "note 18. related party transactions" of the notes to consolidated financial statements in item 8 herein for further discussion of related party transactions. forward-looking statements this form 10-k, including md&a and certain statements in the notes to consolidated financial statements, contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of section 27a of the securities act of 1933, as amended, and section 21e of the exchange act of 1934, as amended, (each a "forward-looking statement"). all statements, other than historical facts, including statements regarding the presentation of the company's operations in future reports and any assumptions underlying any of the foregoing, are forward-looking statements. forward-looking statements concern future circumstances and results and other statements that are not historical facts and are sometimes identified by the words "may," "will," "should," "potential," "intend," "expect," "endeavor," "seek," "anticipate," "estimate," "overestimate," "underestimate," "believe," "could," "project," "predict," "continue," "target," "goal" or other similar words or expressions. forward-looking statements are based upon current plans, estimates and expectations that are subject to risks, uncertainties and assumptions. should one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize, or should underlying assumptions prove incorrect, actual results may vary materially from those indicated or anticipated by such forward-looking statements. the inclusion of such statements should not be regarded as a representation that such plans, estimates or expectations will be achieved. important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from such plans, estimates or expectations include, among others, the risk factors identified in the "risk factors" section of part 1 of item 1a of this form 10-k and those set forth from time-to-time in other filings by the company with the sec. these documents are available through our website or through the sec's electronic data gathering and analysis retrieval (edgar) system at http://www.sec.gov. in light of such risks and uncertainties, we caution you not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements. these forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of this annual report, or if earlier, as of the date they were made. we do not intend to, and disclaim any obligation to, update or revise any forward-looking statements unless required by securities law.