item 7. management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations ("md&a") should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements included in item 8. financial statements and supplementary data contained herein. for management's discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for fiscal year 2020 as compared to fiscal year 2019 please refer to part ii, item 7. "management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations" on form 10-k for our fiscal year ended december 31, 2020, filed with the securities and exchange commission ("sec") on february 25, 2021. executive summary we are an energy technology company with a broad and diversified portfolio of technologies and services that span the energy and industrial value chain. we operate through our four business segments: oilfield services ("ofs"), oilfield equipment ("ofe"), turbomachinery & process solutions ("tps"), and digital solutions ("ds"). we sell products and services primarily in the global oil and gas markets, within the upstream, midstream and downstream segments. as we reflect on the macro environment in 2021, the global economy continued to recover from the impact of the covid-19 global pandemic. the oil markets experienced increasing levels of demand and continued restraints on supply translating into a strong oil price recovery. for natural gas, a combination of demand and supply factors converged, pushing natural gas and lng prices to record levels in both europe and in asia. the natural gas price spikes also highlighted the fragility of the global energy system as the world transitions to net zero emissions. the effects from variant strains of the covid-19 virus continued to impact operations in the form of global chip shortages, supply chain challenges, and inflationary pressures in multiple parts of the world. as we look ahead to 2022, we expect global economic growth to remain strong; however, growth rates are likely to moderate from 2021 levels as central banks are expected to begin tightening monetary policy in order to quell growing inflationary pressures. despite the expected slowdown in the pace of growth, we believe the expected continuing broader macro recovery will translate into rising energy demand in 2022, with oil demand likely recovering to pre-pandemic levels by the end of the year. we expect continued momentum in the global natural gas markets in 2022, building on a strong 2021. our positive long-term view on gas is also supported by the recent improvements in policy sentiment in certain parts of the world towards natural gas’ broader role within the energy transition. outside of the oil and gas industry, the focus on cleaner energy sources and technology to lower carbon emissions from resource-intensive industries continues to accelerate. in the u.s., europe, and asia, various renewables, and green and blue hydrogen projects are moving forward, as well as a number of ccus projects. on the new energy front, we were active this year in pursuing early-stage technologies in ccus and in hydrogen. in ccus, we acquired a position in electrochaea, a bio-methanation company, and also entered into an exclusive license with sri international for mixed-salt process technology. in hydrogen, we made an investment in ekona, a growth stage company developing novel turquoise hydrogen production technology, as well as nemesys, a technology company focused on a range of early-stage hydrogen technologies. on the industrial front, we completed the acquisition of arms reliability and an investment in augury, which will help baker hughes continue to build out its industrial asset management platform and deliver an expanded set of asset performance capabilities. baker hughes was successful on many fronts in 2021, with key commercial successes and developments in the lng and new energy markets, solid margin improvements, as well as strong cash flows from operating activities and free cash flow (a non-gaap measure defined as cash flows from operating activities less expenditures for capital assets plus the proceeds from disposal of assets). our strong cash flow performance provides our company ample flexibility and optionality for our broader capital allocation strategy. as evidence of this, we returned almost $1.2 billion back to shareholders through dividends and buybacks in 2021, while also making multiple acquisitions and investments across the industrial and new energy spaces. baker hughes company 2021 form 10-k | 28 in 2021, we generated revenue of $20.5 billion, compared to $20.7 billion in 2020. the decrease in revenue was primarily driven by lower volume in ofs and ofe, partially offset by higher volume in tps and ds. income before income taxes was $428 million in 2021, and included restructuring, impairment and other charges of $209 million, separation related costs of $60 million, a loss of $1,085 million related to our investment in c3 ai, partially offset by a gain of $241 million related to our investment in adnoc drilling, both recorded in other non-operating income/(loss). loss before income taxes was $15.2 billion in 2020, and included goodwill impairment charges of $14.8 billion, restructuring, impairment and other charges of $1.9 billion, inventory impairment charges of $246 million, separation related costs of $134 million, and a gain of $1.4 billion related to our investment in c3 ai recorded in other non-operating income. outlook our business is exposed to a number of macro factors, which influence our outlook and expectations given the current volatile conditions in the industry. all of our outlook expectations are purely based on the market as we see it today, and are subject to changing conditions in the industry. •north america onshore activity: we expect north american onshore to experience strong growth in 2022, as compared to 2021 should commodity prices remain at current levels. •international onshore activity: we expect onshore spending outside of north america to continue to improve in 2022 as compared to 2021 should commodity prices remain at current levels. •offshore projects: we expect a modest recovery in offshore activity and the number of subsea tree awards to grow in 2022 as compared to 2021. •lng projects: we remain optimistic on the lng market long term and view natural gas as both a transition and a destination fuel. we continue to view the long-term economics of the lng industry as positive. we have other segments in our portfolio that are more correlated with various industrial metrics, including global gdp growth, such as our digital solutions segment. we also have businesses within our portfolio that are exposed to new energy solutions, specifically focused around reducing carbon emissions of energy and broader industry, including hydrogen, geothermal, ccus, and energy storage. we expect to see continued growth in these businesses as new energy solutions become a more prevalent part of the broader energy mix. overall, we believe our portfolio is well positioned to compete across the energy value chain and deliver comprehensive solutions for our customers. we remain optimistic about the long-term economics of the oil and gas industry, but we are continuing to operate with flexibility. over time, we believe the world’s demand for energy will continue to rise, and that hydrocarbons will play a major role in meeting the world's energy needs for the foreseeable future. as such, we remain focused on delivering innovative, low-emission, and cost-effective solutions that deliver step changes in operating and economic performance for our customers. baker hughes company 2021 form 10-k | 29 business environment the following discussion and analysis summarizes the significant factors affecting our results of operations, financial condition and liquidity position as of and for the year ended december 31, 2021 and 2020, and should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes of the company. our revenue is predominately generated from the sale of products and services to major, national, and independent oil and natural gas companies worldwide, and is dependent on spending by our customers for oil and natural gas exploration, field development and production. this spending is driven by a number of factors, including our customers' forecasts of future energy demand and supply, their access to resources to develop and produce oil and natural gas, their ability to fund their capital programs, the impact of new government regulations and most importantly, their expectations for oil and natural gas prices as a key driver of their cash flows. oil and natural gas prices oil and natural gas prices are summarized in the table below as averages of the daily closing prices during each of the periods indicated. 20212020 brent oil prices ($/bbl) (1) $70.86 $41.96 wti oil prices ($/bbl) (2) 68.14 39.16 natural gas prices ($/mmbtu) (3) 3.89 2.03 (1)energy information administration ("eia") europe brent spot price per barrel (2)eia cushing, ok wti ("west texas intermediate") spot price (3)eia henry hub natural gas spot price per million british thermal unit after a volatile year in 2020, when oil prices dropped due to lower demand, the combination of demand and supply in 2021 resulted in higher oil prices and raised natural gas and lng prices to record breaking levels. outside north america, customer spending is most heavily influenced by brent oil prices. the average brent oil prices increased to $70.86/bbl in 2021 from $41.96/bbl in 2020 and ranged from a low of $50.37/bbl in january 2021, to a high of $85.76/bbl in october 2021. in north america, customer spending is highly driven by wti oil prices, which similarly to brent oil prices, on average increased to $68.14/bbl in 2021 from $39.16/bbl in 2020, and ranged from a low of $47.47/bbl in january 2021, to a high of $85.64/bbl in october 2021. in north america, natural gas prices, as measured by the henry hub natural gas spot price, averaged $3.89/mmbtu in 2021, representing a 92% increase over the prior year. throughout the year, henry hub natural gas spot prices ranged from a high of $23.86/mmbtu in february 2021, to a low of $2.43/mmbtu in april 2021. according to the u.s. department of energy, working natural gas in storage at the end of 2021 was 3,226 billion cubic feet ("bcf"), which was 6.8%, or 234 bcf, below the corresponding week in 2020. baker hughes company 2021 form 10-k | 30 baker hughes rig count the baker hughes rig counts are an important business barometer for the drilling industry and its suppliers. when drilling rigs are active they consume products and services produced by the oil service industry. rig count trends are driven by the exploration and development spending by oil and natural gas companies, which in turn is influenced by current and future price expectations for oil and natural gas. the counts may reflect the relative strength and stability of energy prices and overall market activity, however, these counts should not be solely relied on as other specific and pervasive conditions may exist that affect overall energy prices and market activity. we have been providing rig counts to the public since 1944. we gather all relevant data through our field service personnel, who obtain the necessary data from routine visits to the various rigs, customers, contractors and other outside sources as necessary. we base the classification of a well as either oil or natural gas primarily upon filings made by operators in the relevant jurisdiction. this data is then compiled and distributed to various wire services and trade associations and is published on our website. we believe the counting process and resulting data is reliable, however, it is subject to our ability to obtain accurate and timely information. rig counts are compiled weekly for the u.s. and canada and monthly for all international rigs. published international rig counts do not include rigs drilling in certain locations, such as russia, the caspian region and onshore china because this information is not readily available. rigs in the u.s. and canada are counted as active if, on the day the count is taken, the well being drilled has been started but drilling has not been completed and the well is anticipated to be of sufficient depth to be a potential consumer of our drill bits. in international areas, rigs are counted on a weekly basis and deemed active if drilling activities occurred during the majority of the week. the weekly results are then averaged for the month and published accordingly. the rig count does not include rigs that are in transit from one location to another, rigging up, being used in non-drilling activities including production testing, completion and workover, and are not expected to be significant consumers of drill bits. the rig counts are summarized in the table below as averages for each of the periods indicated. 20212020 north america610 522 international756 827 worldwide1,366 1,349 2021 compared to 2020 overall the rig count was 1,366 in 2021, an increase of 1% as compared to 2020 due primarily to an increase in activity in north america partially offset by declines internationally. the rig count in north america increased 17% and the international rig count decreased 9% in 2021 compared to 2020. within north america, the increase was primarily driven by the canadian rig count, which was up 48% on average when compared to the same period last year, and an increase in the u.s. rig count, which was up 10% on average. internationally, the decrease in the rig count was driven primarily by decreases in the middle east region, africa region and europe region of 21%, 10%, and 10%, respectively. results of operations the discussions below relating to significant line items from our consolidated statements of income (loss) are based on available information and represent our analysis of significant changes or events that impact the comparability of reported amounts. where appropriate, we have identified specific events and changes that affect comparability or trends and, where reasonably practicable, have quantified the impact of such items. in addition, the discussions below for revenue and cost of revenue are on a total basis as the business drivers for product sales and services are similar. all dollar amounts in tabulations in this section are in millions of dollars, unless otherwise stated. certain columns and rows may not add due to the use of rounded numbers. our results of operations are evaluated by the chief executive officer on a consolidated basis as well as at the segment level. the performance of our operating segments is evaluated based on segment operating income baker hughes company 2021 form 10-k | 31 (loss), which is defined as income (loss) before income taxes and before the following: net interest expense, net other non-operating income (loss), corporate expenses, restructuring, impairment and other charges, goodwill and inventory impairments, separation-related costs, and certain gains and losses not allocated to the operating segments. in evaluating the segment performance, the company uses the following: volume: volume is the increase or decrease in products and/or services sold period-over-period excluding the impact of foreign exchange and price. the volume impact on profit is calculated by multiplying the prior period profit rate by the change in revenue volume between the current and prior period. it also includes price, defined as the change in sales price for a comparable product or service period-over-period and is calculated as the period-over-period change in sales prices of comparable products and services. foreign exchange ("fx"): fx measures the translational foreign exchange impact, or the translation impact of the period-over-period change on sales and costs directly attributable to change in the foreign exchange rate compared to the u.s. dollar. fx impact is calculated by multiplying the functional currency amounts (revenue or profit) with the period-over-period fx rate variance, using the average exchange rate for the respective period. (inflation)/deflation: (inflation)/deflation is defined as the increase or decrease in direct and indirect costs of the same type for an equal amount of volume. it is calculated as the year-over-year change in cost (i.e. price paid) of direct material, compensation and benefits, and overhead costs. productivity: productivity is measured by the remaining variance in profit, after adjusting for the period-over-period impact of volume and price, foreign exchange and (inflation)/deflation as defined above. improved or lower period-over-period cost productivity is the result of cost efficiencies or inefficiencies, such as cost decreasing or increasing more than volume, or cost increasing or decreasing less than volume, or changes in sales mix among segments. this also includes the period-over-period variance of transactional foreign exchange, aside from those foreign currency devaluations that are reported separately for business evaluation purposes. orders and remaining performance obligations our statement of income (loss) displays sales and costs of sales in accordance with sec regulations under which “goods” is required to include all sales of tangible products and “services” must include all other sales, including other services activities. for the amounts shown below, we distinguish between “equipment” and “product services,” where product services refers to sales under product services agreements, including sales of both goods (such as spare parts and equipment upgrades) and related services (such as monitoring, maintenance and repairs), which is an important part of our operations. we refer to “product services” simply as “services” within management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations. orders: we recognized orders of $21.7 billion and $20.7 billion in 2021 and 2020, respectively. in 2021, equipment orders were up 3% and service orders were up 6%, compared to 2020. remaining performance obligations ("rpo"): as of december 31, 2021 and 2020, the aggregate amount of the transaction price allocated to the unsatisfied (or partially unsatisfied) performance obligations was $23.6 billion and $23.4 billion, respectively. baker hughes company 2021 form 10-k | 32 revenue and segment operating income before tax revenue and segment operating income for each of our four operating segments is provided below. year ended december 31,$ change 20212020from 2020 to 2021 revenue: oilfield services$9,542 $10,140 $(598) oilfield equipment2,486 2,844 (358) turbomachinery & process solutions6,417 5,705 712 digital solutions2,057 2,015 42 total$20,502 $20,705 $(203) year ended december 31,$ change 20212020from 2020 to 2021 segment operating income: oilfield services$761 $487 $274 oilfield equipment69 19 50 turbomachinery & process solutions1,050 805 245 digital solutions126 193 (67) total segment operating income 2,006 1,504 502 corporate(429)(464)35 inventory impairment (1) — (246)246 goodwill impairment— (14,773)14,773 restructuring, impairment and other(209)(1,866)1,657 separation related(60)(134)74 operating income (loss)1,310 (15,978)17,288 other non-operating income (loss), net(583)1,040 (1,623) interest expense, net(299)(264)(35) income (loss) before income taxes428 (15,202)15,630 provision for income taxes(758)(559)(199) net loss$(330)$(15,761)$15,431 (1)inventory impairments are reported in "cost of goods sold" of the consolidated statements of income (loss). fiscal year 2021 to fiscal year 2020 revenue in 2021 was $20,502 million, a decrease of $203 million, or 1%, from 2020. this decrease in revenue was largely a result of decreased activity in ofs and ofe, partially offset by an increase in tps and ds. ofs decreased $598 million, ofe decreased $358 million, tps increased $712 million, and ds increased $42 million. total segment operating income in 2021 was $2,006 million, an increase of $502 million, or 33%, from 2020. the increase was primarily driven by ofs, which increased $274 million, tps, which increased $245 million, and ofe, which increased $50 million, partially offset by ds, which decreased $67 million. oilfield services ofs 2021 revenue was $9,542 million, a decrease of $598 million, or 6%, from 2020, primarily as a result of decreased international activity in 2021 compared to 2020, as evidenced by a decline in the corresponding rig baker hughes company 2021 form 10-k | 33 count, and, to a lesser extent, to decreased activity in north america and supply chain constraints in the second half of 2021. north america revenue was $2,773 million in 2021, a decrease of $28 million from 2020. international revenue was $6,769 million in 2021, a decrease of $569 million from 2020, primarily driven by declines in the middle east, partially offset by growth in latin america. ofs 2021 segment operating income was $761 million, compared to $487 million in 2020. the increase was primarily driven by higher cost productivity as a result of cost efficiencies and restructuring actions, and price in certain product lines, partially offset by lower volume and commodity costs inflation. oilfield equipment ofe 2021 revenue was $2,486 million, a decrease of $358 million, or 13%, from 2020. the decrease was primarily driven by lower volume in the subsea production systems business, the disposition of the surface pressure control flow business in the fourth quarter of 2020, and the removal of subsea drilling systems from consolidated ofe operations in the fourth quarter of 2021 due to the formation of a joint venture, partially offset by higher volume in the services and flexible pipe businesses. ofe 2021 segment operating income was $69 million, compared to $19 million in 2020. the increase was primarily driven by higher cost productivity from our cost out programs and favorable business mix. turbomachinery & process solutions tps 2021 revenue was $6,417 million, an increase of $712 million, or 12%, from 2020. the increase was primarily driven by higher equipment and projects revenue, as well as higher services volume. in 2021, equipment revenue represented 45% and services revenue represented 55% of total revenue. equipment revenue was up 15% year-over-year, and services revenue was up 10% year-over-year. tps 2021 segment operating income was $1,050 million, compared to $805 million in 2020. the increase in profitability was driven primarily by higher volume and increased cost productivity, partially offset by unfavorable business mix. digital solutions ds 2021 revenue was $2,057 million, an increase of $42 million, or 2%, from 2020, mainly driven by higher volume across the process & pipeline services and waygate technologies businesses, partially offset by declines in the nexus controls business. ds revenue growth was affected by supply chain constraints that impacted product deliveries. ds 2021 segment operating income was $126 million, compared to $193 million in 2020. the decrease in profitability was primarily driven by lower cost productivity and unfavorable business mix. corporate in 2021, corporate expenses were $429 million, a decrease of $35 million compared to 2020, primarily driven by lower expenses as a result of cost efficiencies and restructuring actions. inventory impairment there were no inventory impairments during 2021. in 2020, we recorded inventory impairments of $246 million primarily related to our oilfield services segment as a result of certain restructuring activities initiated by the company. charges for inventory impairments are predominately reported in the "cost of goods sold" caption of the consolidated statements of income (loss). goodwill impairment there were no goodwill impairments during 2021. during the first quarter of 2020, the company’s market capitalization declined significantly driven by current macroeconomic and geopolitical conditions including the baker hughes company 2021 form 10-k | 34 decrease in demand caused by the covid-19 pandemic and collapse of oil prices driven by both surplus production and supply. based on these events, we concluded that a triggering event occurred and we performed an interim quantitative impairment test as of march 31, 2020. based upon the results of the impairment test, we recognized a goodwill impairment charge of $14,773 million during the first quarter of 2020. there were no other goodwill impairments during 2020. restructuring, impairment and other in 2021, we recognized $209 million in restructuring, impairment and other charges. the charges in 2021 primarily relate to the initiatives in our ofs segment that are the continuation of our overall strategy to right-size our structural costs. in 2020, we recognized $1,866 million in restructuring, impairment and other charges. these charges primarily related to the restructuring plan announced in the first quarter of 2020, which included product line rationalization actions, headcount reductions in certain geographical locations, and other initiatives to right-size operations for anticipated activity levels and market conditions. separation related we recorded $60 million of separation related costs in 2021, a decrease of $74 million from the prior year. costs relate to the ongoing activities for the separation from ge, primarily related to information technology. other non-operating income/(loss), net in 2021, we recorded $583 million of other non-operating loss. costs in 2021 include losses of $1,085 million from marking our investment in c3 ai to fair value, partially offset by a gain of $241 million from marking our investment in adnoc drilling to fair value, by the reversal of $121 million of current accruals due to the settlement of certain legal matters, and by income of $121 million for liabilities that are recoverable as they are indemnified under the tax matters agreement with ge. this income from indemnified liabilities has an offset in the "provision for income taxes" caption in our consolidated statements of income (loss). in 2020, we recorded $1,040 million of other non-operating income. included in this amount was a gain of $1,417 million related to marking our investment in c3 ai to fair value, partially offset by losses of $353 million for the sale of the rod lift systems business in ofs, and the sale of the surface pressure control flow business in ofe. interest expense, net in 2021, we incurred net interest expense of $299 million, an increase of $35 million from the prior year, primarily driven by higher interest expense, mainly related to $28 million of costs associated with the refinancing of our senior notes due december 2022, and lower interest income. income taxes in 2021, our income tax expense was $758 million, an increase of $199 million, from $559 million in 2020. the increase was primarily due to tax expense related to unrecognized tax benefits and the geographical mix of earnings. our 2021 income tax expense includes $121 million that is recoverable as it relates to liabilities indemnified under the tax matters agreement with ge. this tax expense has an offset in the "other non-operating income (loss), net" caption in our consolidated statements of income (loss). compliance we, in the conduct of all of our activities, are committed to maintaining the core values of our company, as well as high safety, ethical, and quality standards as also reported in our quality management system ("qms"). we believe such a commitment is integral to running a sound, successful, and sustainable business. we devote significant resources to maintain a comprehensive global ethics and compliance program ("compliance program") which is designed to prevent, detect, and appropriately respond to any potential violations of the law, the code of conduct, and other company policies and procedures. baker hughes company 2021 form 10-k | 35 highlights of our compliance program include the following: •comprehensive internal policies over such areas as anti-bribery; travel, entertainment, gifts and charitable donations to government officials and other parties; payments to commercial sales representatives; and, the use of non-u.s. police or military organizations for security purposes. in addition, there are policies and procedures to address customs requirements, visa processing risks, export and re-export controls, economic sanctions, anti-money laundering and anti-boycott laws. •global and independent structure of chief compliance officer and other compliance professionals providing compliance advice, customized training and governance, as well as investigating concerns across all regions and countries where we do business. •comprehensive employee compliance training program that combines instructor-led and web-based training modules tailored to the key risks that employees face on an ongoing basis. •due diligence and monitoring procedures for third parties who conduct business on our behalf, including channel partners (sales representatives, distributors, resellers), and administrative service providers. •due diligence procedures for acquisition activities. •specifically tailored compliance risk assessments and audits focused on country and third party risk. •compliance review board comprised of senior officers of the company that meets quarterly to monitor effectiveness of the compliance program, as well as product company and regional compliance committees that meet quarterly. •technology to monitor and report on compliance matters, including an internal investigations management system, a web-based anti-boycott reporting tool, global trade management systems and comprehensive watch list screening. •data privacy compliance policies and procedures to ensure compliance with applicable data privacy requirements. •a compliance program designed to create an “open reporting environment” where employees are encouraged to report any ethics or compliance matter without fear of retaliation, including a global network of trained employee ombudspersons, and a worldwide, 24-hour business helpline operated by a third party and available in approximately 200 languages. •centralized finance organization with company-wide policies. •anti-corruption audits of high-risk countries, as well as risk-based compliance audits of third parties. •we have region-specific processes and procedures for management of hr related issues, including pre-hire screening of employees; a process to screen existing employees prior to promotion into select roles where they may be exposed to finance and/or corruption-related risks; and implementation of a global new hire training module which includes compliance training for all employees. liquidity and capital resources our objective in financing our business is to maintain sufficient liquidity, adequate financial resources, and financial flexibility in order to fund the requirements of our business. despite the challenging dynamics that began in 2020 as a result of the covid-19 pandemic, we continue to maintain solid financial strength and liquidity. at december 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $3.9 billion compared to $4.1 billion at december 31, 2020. our liquidity is further supported by a revolving credit facility of $3 billion, and access to both commercial paper and uncommitted lines of credit. at december 31, 2021, we had no borrowings outstanding under the revolving credit facility, our commercial paper program or our uncommitted lines of credit. our next debt maturity is december 2023. baker hughes company 2021 form 10-k | 36 we held cash and cash equivalents in the u.s. of approximately $1.6 billion and $1.0 billion and outside the u.s. of approximately $2.2 billion and $3.1 billion as of december 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. a substantial portion of the cash held outside the u.s. at december 31, 2021 has been reinvested in active non-u.s. business operations. if we decide at a later date to repatriate those funds to the u.s., we may incur other additional taxes that would not be significant to the total tax provision. we have a $3 billion committed unsecured revolving credit facility ("the credit agreement") with commercial banks maturing in december 2024. the credit agreement contains certain customary representations and warranties, certain customary affirmative covenants and certain customary negative covenants. upon the occurrence of certain events of default, our obligations under the credit agreement may be accelerated. such events of default include payment defaults to lenders under the credit agreement and other customary defaults. no such events of default have occurred. we have no borrowings under the credit agreement. in addition, we have a commercial paper program under which we may issue from time to time commercial paper with maturities of no more than 397 days. as a result of the repayment of £600 million of our commercial paper on april 30, 2021, originally issued in may of 2020 under the covid corporate financing facility established by the bank of england, our authorized commercial paper program was reduced from $3.8 billion to $3 billion. certain senior notes contain covenants that restrict our ability to take certain actions. see "note 10. borrowings" of the notes to consolidated financial statements in this annual report for further details. at december 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all debt covenants. we continuously review our liquidity and capital resources. if market conditions were to change, for instance due to the uncertainty created by a global pandemic or a significant decline in oil and gas prices, and our revenue was reduced significantly or operating costs were to increase significantly, our cash flows and liquidity could be negatively impacted. additionally, it could cause the rating agencies to lower our credit ratings. there are no ratings triggers that would accelerate the maturity of any borrowings under our committed credit facility; however, a downgrade in our credit ratings could increase the cost of borrowings under the credit facility and could also limit or preclude our ability to issue commercial paper. should this occur, we could seek alternative sources of funding, including borrowing under the credit facility. during the year ended december 31, 2021, we dispersed cash to fund a variety of activities including certain working capital needs, restructuring and ge separation related costs, capital expenditures, the payment of dividends, distributions to noncontrolling interests, repayment of debt, and repurchases of our common stock. cash flows cash flows provided by (used in) each type of activity were as follows for the years ended december 31: (in millions)20212020 operating activities$2,374 $1,304 investing activities(463)(618) financing activities(2,143)225 fiscal year 2021 to fiscal year 2020 operating activities our largest source of operating cash is payments from customers, of which the largest component is collecting cash related to our sales of products and services including advance payments or progress collections for work to be performed. the primary use of operating cash is to pay our suppliers, employees, tax authorities and others for a wide range of goods and services. cash flows from operating activities generated cash of $2,374 million and $1,304 million for the years ended december 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. for the year ended december 31, 2021, cash generated from operating activities were primarily driven by net losses adjusted for certain noncash items (including depreciation, amortization and loss on equity securities). in addition, working capital, which includes contract and other deferred baker hughes company 2021 form 10-k | 37 assets, generated $480 million of cash in 2021 primarily due to accounts payable, inventories and contract and other deferred assets partially offset by accounts receivable and progress collections, as we continue to make progress on improving our working capital processes. restructuring and ge separation related payments were $175 million on a net basis in 2021 and include the proceeds from the disposal of certain facilities, which are reflected below in investing activities. in 2020, working capital generated $216 million of cash primarily due to receivables and positive progress collections partially offset by accounts payable. restructuring and ge separation related payments were $670 million in 2020. investing activities cash flows from investing activities used cash of $463 million and $618 million for the years ended december 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. our principal recurring investing activity is the funding of capital expenditures to ensure that we have the appropriate levels and types of machinery and equipment in place to generate revenue from operations. expenditures for capital assets totaled $856 million and $974 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively, partially offset by cash flows from the sale of property, plant and equipment of $315 million and $187 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. proceeds from the disposal of assets related to equipment that was lost-in-hole, and to property, machinery and equipment no longer used in operations that was sold throughout the period. in 2021, we contributed our subsea drilling systems business to create a joint venture and received as consideration 50% of the shares of the joint venture, cash of $70 million, and a promissory note of $80 million. in 2020, we received proceeds of $187 million primarily from the sale of our rod lift systems and our surface pressure control flow businesses. we invested $179 million during 2021 in adding capabilities to our new energy and industrial asset management offerings through the acquisition of business interests in augury, ekona power and electrochaea, among others. in 2021, we sold approximately 2.2 million shares of c3 ai class a common stock and received proceeds of $145 million, which is reported as other investing activity. financing activities cash flows from financing activities used cash of $2,143 million and generated cash of $225 million for the years ended december 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. we had net repayments of short-term debt of $41 million and $204 million and long-term debt of $1,313 million and $42 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. the repayment of long-term debt in 2021 was primarily driven by the early repayment of our 2.773% senior notes due december 2022 ("the 2022 notes") with a principal amount of $1,250 million. in addition, a charge of $28 million related to the early redemption was recorded within "interest expense, net" in our consolidated statement of income (loss). in december 2021, we received proceeds from the issuance of $650 million aggregate principal amount of 1.231% senior notes due december 2023 and $600 million aggregate principal amount of 2.061% senior notes due december 2026. in 2020, we had proceeds from the issuance of $500 million aggregate principal amount of 4.486% senior notes due may 2030. we repaid $832 million (£600 million) of commercial paper in april 2021 originally issued in may 2020 ($737 million at date of issuance) under the covid corporate financing facility established by the bank of england. during 2021, we paid dividends of $592 million to our class a stockholders, and we made a distribution of $157 million to ge. during 2020, we paid dividends of $488 million to our class a stockholders, and we made a distribution of $256 million to ge. baker hughes company 2021 form 10-k | 38 on july 30, 2021, our board of directors authorized each of the company and bhh llc to repurchase up to $2 billion of its class a common stock and llc units, respectively. during 2021, the company and bhh llc repurchased and canceled 17.6 million shares of class a common stock and llc units, respectively, for a total of $434 million. cash requirements we believe cash on hand, cash flows from operating activities, the available revolving credit facility, access to both our commercial paper program or our uncommitted lines of credit, and availability under our existing shelf registrations of debt will provide us with sufficient capital resources and liquidity in the short-term and long-term to manage our working capital needs, meet contractual obligations, fund capital expenditures and dividends, repay debt, repurchase our common stock, and support the development of our short-term and long-term operating strategies. when necessary, we issue commercial paper or other short-term debt to fund cash needs in the u.s. in excess of the cash generated in the u.s. our capital expenditures can be adjusted and managed by us to match market demand and activity levels. based on current market conditions, capital expenditures in 2022 will be made at a rate that we estimate would equal up to 5% of annual revenue. the expenditures are expected to be used primarily for normal, recurring items necessary to support our business. we also anticipate making income tax payments in the range of $550 million to $650 million in 2022. contractual obligations and commitments our material cash commitments from known contractual and other obligations consist primarily of obligations for long-term debt and related interest, leases for property and equipment, and purchase obligations as part of normal operations. certain amounts included in our contractual obligations as of december 31, 2021 are based on our estimates and assumptions about these obligations, including their duration, anticipated actions by third parties and other factors. see “note 10. borrowings” of the notes to consolidated financial statements in item 8 herein for information regarding scheduled maturities of our long-term debt. see “note 9. leases” of the notes to consolidated financial statements in item 8 herein for information regarding scheduled maturities of our operating leases. as of december 31, 2021, we had expected cash payments for estimated interest on our long-term debt and finance lease obligations of $242 million payable within the next twelve months and $3,141 million payable thereafter. as of december 31, 2021, we had purchase obligations of $1,304 million payable within the next twelve months and $397 million payable thereafter. our purchase obligations include expenditures for capital assets for 2022 as well as agreements to purchase goods or services or licenses that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify all significant terms, including: fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transaction. due to the uncertainty with respect to the timing of potential future cash outflows associated with our uncertain tax positions, we are unable to make reasonable estimates of the period of cash settlement, if any, to the respective taxing authorities. therefore, $733 million in uncertain tax positions, including interest and penalties, have been excluded from the contractual obligations discussed above. see "note 12. income taxes" of the notes to consolidated financial statements in item 8 herein for further information. other factors affecting liquidity registration statements: in may 2021, baker hughes filed a universal automatic shelf registration statement on form s-3asr with the sec to have the ability to sell various types of securities including debt securities, class a common stock, preferred stock, guarantees of debt securities, purchase contracts and units. the specific terms of any securities to be sold would be described in supplemental filings with the sec. the registration statement will expire in may 2024. baker hughes company 2021 form 10-k | 39 in december 2020, bhh llc, baker hughes netherlands funding company b.v., and baker hughes co-obligor, inc. filed a shelf registration statement on form s-3 with the sec to have the ability to sell up to $3 billion in debt securities in amounts to be determined at the time of an offering. any such offering, if it does occur, may happen in one or more transactions. the specific terms of any debt securities to be sold would be described in supplemental filings with the sec. the registration statement will expire in december 2023. customer receivables: in line with industry practice, we may bill our customers for services provided in arrears dependent upon contractual terms. in a challenging economic environment, we may experience delays in the payment of our invoices due to customers' lower cash flow from operations or their more limited access to credit markets. while historically there have not been material non-payment events, we attempt to mitigate this risk through working with our customers to restructure their debts. a customer's failure or delay in payment could have a material adverse effect on our short-term liquidity and results from operations. as of december 31, 2021, 13% of our gross customer receivables were from customers in the u.s. and 12% were from customers in mexico. as of december 31, 2020, 16% of our gross customer receivables were from customers in the u.s. no other country accounted for more than 10% of our gross customer receivables at these dates. international operations: our cash that is held outside the u.s. is 57% of the total cash balance as of december 31, 2021. we may not be able to use this cash quickly and efficiently due to exchange or cash controls that could make it challenging. as a result, our cash balance may not represent our ability to quickly and efficiently use this cash. supply chain finance programs: under supply chain finance programs, administered by a third party, our suppliers are given the opportunity to sell receivables from us to participating financial institutions at their sole discretion at a rate that leverages our credit rating and thus might be more beneficial to our suppliers. our responsibility is limited to making payment on the terms originally negotiated with our supplier, regardless of whether the supplier sells its receivable to a financial institution. the range of payment terms we negotiate with our suppliers is consistent, irrespective of whether a supplier participates in the program. these liabilities continue to be presented as accounts payable in our consolidated statements of financial position and reflected as cash flow from operating activities when settled. we do not believe that changes in the availability of supply chain financing programs would have a material impact on our liquidity. critical accounting estimates an accounting policy is deemed to be critical if the nature of the estimate or assumption it incorporates is subject to a material level of judgment related to matters that are highly uncertain and changes in those estimates and assumptions are reasonably likely to materially impact our consolidated financial statements. these estimates reflect our best judgment about current, and for some estimates, future, economic and market conditions and their potential effects based on information available as of the date of these financial statements. if these conditions change from those expected, it is reasonably possible that the judgments and estimates described below could change, which may result in future impairments of goodwill, or the establishment of valuation allowances on deferred tax assets and increased tax liabilities, among other effects. also, see "note 1. summary of significant accounting policies" of the notes to consolidated financial statements in item 8 herein, which discusses our most significant accounting policies. the audit committee of our board of directors has reviewed our critical accounting estimates and the disclosure presented below. during the past three fiscal years, we have not made any material changes in the methodology used to establish the critical accounting estimates, and we believe that the following are the critical accounting estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements for the year ended december 31, 2021. there are other items within our consolidated financial statements that require estimation and judgment but they are not deemed critical as defined above. revenue recognition on long-term product services agreements we have long-term service agreements with our customers predominately within our tps segment. these agreements typically require us to maintain assets sold to the customer over a defined contract term. these agreements have average contract terms of greater than 10 years. from time to time, these contract terms may be extended through contract modifications or amendments, which may result in revisions to future billing and cost baker hughes company 2021 form 10-k | 40 estimates. revenue recognition on long-term product services agreements requires estimates of both customer payments and the costs to perform required maintenance services over the contract term. we recognize revenue on an overtime basis using input method to measure our progress toward completion at the estimated margin rate of the contract. to develop our billings estimates, we consider the number of billable events that will occur based on estimated utilization of the asset under contract, over the life of the contract term. this estimated utilization will consider both historical and market conditions, asset retirements and new product introductions, if applicable. to develop our cost estimates, we consider the timing and extent of maintenance and overhaul events, including the amount and cost of labor, spare parts and other resources required to perform the services. in developing our cost estimates, we utilize a combination of our historical cost experience and expected cost improvements. cost improvements are only included in future cost estimates after savings have been observed in actual results or proven effective through an extensive regulatory or engineering approval process. we routinely review the estimates used in our product services agreements and regularly revise them to adjust for changes. these revisions are based on objectively verifiable information that is available at the time of the review. the difference between the timing of our revenue recognition and cash received from our customers results in either a contract asset (revenue in excess of billings) or a contract liability (billings in excess of revenue). see "note 7. contract and other deferred assets" and "note 8. progress collections and deferred income" of the notes to consolidated financial statements in item 8 herein for further information. we regularly assess customer credit risk inherent in the carrying amounts of receivables and contract assets and estimated earnings, including the risk that contractual penalties may not be sufficient to offset our accumulated investment in the event of customer termination. we gain insight into expected future utilization and cost trends, as well as credit risk, through our knowledge of the equipment installed and the close interaction with our customers through supplying critical services and parts over extended periods. revisions to cost or billing estimates may affect a product services agreement’s total estimated profitability resulting in an adjustment of earnings; such adjustments generated earnings of $14 million, $17 million and $(1) million for the three years ended december 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. we provide for probable losses when they become evident. on december 31, 2021, our long-term product service agreements, net of related billings in excess of revenues, of $0.3 billion, represent approximately 2.6% of our total estimated life of contract billings of $10.1 billion. cash billings collected on these contracts were approximately $0.6 billion during the years ended december 31, 2021 and 2020. our contracts (on average) are approximately 26% complete based on costs incurred to date and our estimate of future costs. revisions to our estimates of future revenue or costs that increase or decrease total estimated contract profitability by 1% would increase or decrease the long-term product service agreements balance by $0.06 billion. goodwill and other identified intangible assets we perform an annual impairment test of goodwill on a qualitative or quantitative basis for each of our reporting units as of july 1, or more frequently when circumstances indicate an impairment may exist at the reporting unit level. when performing the annual impairment test we have the option of first performing a qualitative assessment to determine the existence of events and circumstances that would lead to a determination that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. if such a conclusion is reached, we would then be required to perform a quantitative impairment assessment of goodwill. a quantitative assessment for the determination of impairment is made by comparing the carrying amount of each reporting unit with its fair value. determining the fair value of a reporting unit is judgmental in nature and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions and typically requires analysis of discounted cash flows and other market information, such as trading multiples, and comparable transactions. cash flow analysis requires judgment regarding many factors, such as management’s projections of future cash flows, weighted-average cost of capital, and long-term growth rates. market information requires judgmental selection of relevant market comparables. we assess the valuation methodology based upon the relevance and availability of the data at the time the valuation is performed. our estimates are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable but which are inherently uncertain, and actual baker hughes company 2021 form 10-k | 41 results may differ from those assumed in our analysis. the determination of whether goodwill is impaired involves a significant level of judgment in these assumptions, and changes in our forecasts, business strategy, government regulations, or economic or market conditions could significantly impact these judgments, potentially decreasing the fair value of one or more reporting units. any resulting impairment charges could have a material impact on our results of operations. income taxes our effective tax rate is based on our income, statutory tax rates, and differences between tax laws and u.s. gaap in various jurisdictions. tax laws are complex and subject to different interpretations by the taxpayer and respective governmental taxing authorities. our rate may be further impacted by the repatriation of foreign earnings that are considered indefinitely reinvested to the extent the repatriation would result in additional taxes such as withholding and income taxes. indefinite reinvestment is determined by management’s judgment and intentions concerning the future operations of the company. in cases where repatriation would otherwise incur significant withholding or income taxes, these foreign earnings have been indefinitely reinvested in active non-u.s. business operations. computation of the potential deferred tax liability associated with these undistributed earnings and any other basis differences is not practicable. deferred income tax assets represent amounts available to reduce income taxes payable in future years. we evaluate the recoverability of these future tax deductions and credits by assessing the adequacy of future taxable income from all sources, including reversal of taxable temporary differences, forecasted operating earnings and available tax planning strategies. these sources of income rely heavily on estimates. we use our historical experience and short and long range business forecasts to provide insight. we record a valuation allowance when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. our tax filings routinely are subject to audit by the tax authorities in the jurisdictions where we conduct business. these audits may result in assessments of additional taxes that are resolved with the tax authorities or through the courts. we have provided for the amounts we believe will ultimately result from these proceedings, but settlements of issues raised in these audits may affect our tax rate. we have $531 million of gross unrecognized tax benefits, excluding interest and penalties, at december 31, 2021. we are not able to reasonably estimate in which future periods these amounts ultimately will be settled. allowance for credit losses the estimation of anticipated credit losses that may be incurred as we work through the invoice collection process with our customers requires us to make judgments and estimates regarding our customers' ability to pay amounts due to us. we monitor our customers' payment history and current credit worthiness to determine that collectability is reasonably assured. we also consider the overall business climate in which our customers operate. for accounts receivable, a loss allowance matrix is utilized to measure lifetime expected credit losses. the matrix contemplates historical credit losses by age of receivables, adjusted for any forward-looking information and management expectations. at december 31, 2021 and 2020, the allowance for credit losses totaled $400 million and $373 million of total gross accounts receivable, respectively. we believe that our allowance for credit losses is adequate to cover the anticipated credit losses under current conditions; however, uncertainties regarding changes in the financial condition of our customers, either adverse or positive, could impact the amount and timing of any additional credit losses that may be required. inventory reserves inventory is a significant component of current assets and is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. this requires us to record provisions and maintain reserves for excess, slow moving, and obsolete inventory. to determine these reserve amounts, we regularly review inventory quantities on hand and compare them to estimates of future product demand, market conditions, production requirements, and technological developments. these estimates and forecasts inherently include uncertainties and require us to make judgments regarding potential future outcomes. at december 31, 2021 and 2020, inventory reserves totaled $374 million and $421 million of gross inventory, respectively. we believe that our reserves are adequate to properly value potential excess, slow moving, and obsolete inventory under current conditions. significant or unanticipated changes to our estimates and baker hughes company 2021 form 10-k | 42 forecasts could impact the amount and timing of any additional provisions for excess, slow moving or obsolete inventory that may be required. new accounting standards to be adopted see "note 1. summary of significant accounting policies" of the notes to consolidated financial statements in item 8 herein for further discussion of accounting standards to be adopted. related party transactions see "note 18. related party transactions" of the notes to consolidated financial statements in item 8 herein for further discussion of related party transactions. forward-looking statements this form 10-k, including md&a and certain statements in the notes to consolidated financial statements, contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of section 27a of the securities act of 1933, as amended, and section 21e of the exchange act of 1934, as amended, (each a "forward-looking statement"). forward-looking statements concern future circumstances and results and other statements that are not historical facts and are sometimes identified by the words "may," "will," "should," "potential," "intend," "expect," "endeavor," "seek," "anticipate," "estimate," "overestimate," "underestimate," "believe," "could," "project," "predict," "continue," "target" or other similar words or expressions. forward-looking statements are based upon current plans, estimates and expectations that are subject to risks, uncertainties and assumptions. should one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize, or should underlying assumptions prove incorrect, actual results may vary materially from those indicated or anticipated by such forward-looking statements. the inclusion of such statements should not be regarded as a representation that such plans, estimates or expectations will be achieved. important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from such plans, estimates or expectations include, among others, the risk factors in the "risk factors" section of part 1 of item 1a of this form 10-k and those set forth from time-to-time in other filings by the company with the sec. these documents are available through our website or through the sec's electronic data gathering and analysis retrieval ("edgar") system at http://www.sec.gov. in light of such risks and uncertainties, we caution you not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements. these forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of this annual report, or if earlier, as of the date they were made. we do not intend to, and disclaim any obligation to, update or revise any forward-looking statements unless required by securities law.