item 7. management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- forward-looking statements certain statements contained in this management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are forward-looking statements. forward-looking statements are also identified by words such as “expects,” “anticipates,” “believes,” “intends,” “plans,” “projects” or similar expressions. actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements for many reasons, including those potential risks set forth in item 1a, of this annual report on form 10-k, which are incorporated herein by reference. overview ii-vi incorporated (“ii-vi,” the “company,” “we,” “us” or “our”), a worldwide leader in engineered materials and optoelectronic components, is a vertically integrated manufacturing company that develops innovative products for diversified applications in the industrial materials processing, optical communications, aerospace and defense, consumer electronics, semiconductor capital equipment, life science and automotive applications and markets. the company produces a wide variety of application-specific photonic and electronic materials and components, and deploys them in various forms, including integration with advanced software. the company generates revenues, earnings and cash flows from developing, manufacturing and marketing engineered materials and optoelectronic components and devices for precision use in industrial materials processing, optical communications, consumer electronics, semiconductor capital equipment, life sciences and automotive applications. we also generate revenue, earnings and cash flows from government funded research and development contracts relating to the development and manufacture of new technologies, materials and products. our customer base includes oems, laser end-users, system integrators of high-power lasers, manufacturers of equipment and devices for the industrial, optical communications, aerospace and defense, semiconductor, medical and life science markets, consumer, u.s. government prime contractors, various u.s. government agencies and thermoelectric integrators. ` in september 2018, november 2018, and march 2019, the company completed its acquisitions of coadna holdings, inc. (“coadna”), an additional product line, and redstone aerospace corporation (“redstone”), respectively. see note 3, acquisitions, to our consolidated financial statements contained in item 8 of this annual report on form 10-k. the operating results of these acquisitions have been reflected in the selected financial information of the company’s ii-vi photonics segment since the respective dates of the acquisitions, with the exclusion of redstone which is reflected in the ii-vi performance products segment. as we grow, we are focused on scaling our company and deriving the continued benefits of vertical integration as we strive to be a best in class competitor in all of our highly competitive markets. the company may elect to change the way in which the company operates or is organized in the future to enable the most efficient implementation of its strategy. pending acquisition of finisar corporation ii-vi and finisar have entered into an agreement and plan of merger, dated as of november 8, 2018 (the “merger agreement”). pursuant to the terms of the merger agreement, mutation merger sub inc., a delaware corporation and wholly owned subsidiary of ii-vi, will be merged with and into finisar, and finisar will continue as the surviving corporation in the merger and a wholly owned subsidiary of ii-vi (the “merger”). if the merger is consummated, finisar stockholders will be entitled to receive, at their election, consideration per share of common stock of finisar (the “finisar common stock”) consisting of (i) $26.00 in cash, without interest (the “cash consideration”), (ii) 0.5546 shares of ii-vi common stock (the shares, the “ii-vi common stock,” and the consideration, the “stock consideration”), or (iii) a combination of $15.60 in cash, without interest, and 0.2218 shares of ii-vi common stock (the “mixed consideration,” and, together with the cash consideration and the stock consideration, the “merger consideration”). the cash consideration and the stock consideration are subject to proration adjustment pursuant to the terms of the merger agreement such that the aggregate merger consideration will consist of approximately 60% cash and approximately 40% ii-vi common stock assuming a per share price of ii-vi common stock equal to the price when the merger agreement was signed on november 8, 2018, which was $46.88 per share. 39 at the effective time of the merger (the “effective time”), each option granted pursuant to finisar’s 2005 stock incentive plan, as such plan has been further amended and restated (each, a “finisar stock option”), or portion thereof, that is outstanding and unexercised as of immediately prior to the effective time (whether vested or unvested) will be cancelled, terminated and converted into the right to receive an amount of mixed consideration that would be payable to a holder of such number of shares of finisar common stock equal to the quotient of (i) the product of (a) the excess, if any, of $26.00 over the exercise price per share of such finisar stock option multiplied by (b) the number of shares of finisar common stock subject to such finisar stock option, divided by (ii) $26.00. at the effective time, each restricted stock unit granted pursuant to finisar’s 2005 stock incentive plan, as such plan has been further amended and restated (each, a “finisar restricted stock unit”), or portion thereof , that is outstanding and subject to a performance-based vesting condition that relates solely to the value of finisar common stock will, to the extent such finisar restricted stock unit vests in accordance with its terms in connection with the merger (the “participating rsus”), be cancelled and extinguished and converted into the right to receive the cash consideration, the stock consideration or the mixed consideration at the election of the holder of such participating rsus, subject to proration adjustment. at the effective time, each finisar restricted stock unit (or portion thereof) that is outstanding and unvested, does not vest in accordance with its terms in connection with the merger and is either (x) subject to time-based vesting requirements only or (y) subject to a performance-based vesting condition other than the value of finisar common stock will be assumed by ii-vi (each, an “assumed rsu”). each assumed rsu will be subject to substantially the same terms and conditions as applied to the related finisar restricted stock unit immediately prior to the effective time, including the vesting schedule (and the applicable performance-vesting conditions in the case of a grant contemplated by clause (y) of the preceding sentence) and any provisions for accelerated vesting applicable thereto, except that the number of shares of ii-vi common stock subject to each assumed rsu will be equal to the product of (i) the number of shares of finisar common stock underlying such unvested finisar restricted stock unit award as of immediately prior to the effective time multiplied by (ii) the sum of (a) 0.2218 plus (b) the quotient obtained by dividing (1) $15.60 by (2) the volume weighted average price per share of ii-vi common stock (rounded to the nearest cent) on the nasdaq global select market for the ten consecutive trading days ending on (and including) the third trading day immediately prior to the effective time (with the resulting number rounded down to the nearest whole share). ii-vi filed with the sec a registration statement on form s-4 relating to the merger, and that registration statement became effective in accordance with the provisions of section 8(a) of the securities act of 1933, as amended, on february 7, 2019. shareholders of ii-vi and stockholders of finisar voted to approve proposals related to the merger at special meetings held on march 26, 2019 by the respective companies. the waiting period under the hart-scott-rodino antitrust improvements act of 1976, as amended, with respect to the merger has expired without a request for additional information. other regulatory approvals applicable to the merger have been obtained in germany, mexico and romania. the completion of the merger is subject to the satisfaction or waiver of certain additional customary closing conditions, including review and approval of the merger by the state administration for market regulation in china. the company is planning to refile with the state administration for market regulation in china, extending the approval period. subject to the satisfaction or waiver of each of the closing conditions, ii-vi and finisar expect that the merger will be completed in the second half of calendar 2019. however, it is possible that factors outside the control of both companies could result in the merger being completed at a different time or not at all. on november 8, 2018, in connection with its entry into the merger agreement, ii-vi entered into a commitment letter (together with a related fee letter) with bank of america, n.a., which was subsequently amended and restated on december 7, 2018 and on december 14, 2018 (together with one or more related fee letters, the “commitment letter”). subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the commitment letter, the lender parties thereto severally committed to provide 100% of up to $2.425 billion in aggregate principal amount of senior secured credit facilities of ii-vi. on march 4, 2019, ii-vi entered into a credit agreement, dated as of march 4, 2019 (as amended, the “new credit agreement”), by and among the company, bank of america, n.a., as administrative agent, swing line lender and an l/c issuer, and the other lenders party thereto. ii-vi also entered into amendment no. 1 to credit agreement, dated as of may 24, 2019, by and among the company, bank of america, n.a., as administrative agent, and the other lenders party thereto, which includes the final results of the syndication of the term a facility (as defined below). pursuant to the terms and subject to the conditions therein, the new credit agreement provides for senior secured financing of $1.705 billion in the aggregate, consisting of (i) a five-year senior secured first-lien term a loan facility in an aggregate principal amount of $1.255 billion (the “term a facility”) and (ii) a five-year senior secured first-lien revolving credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of $450.0 million (the “revolving credit facility” and together with the term a facility, the “new senior credit facilities”). the new credit agreement also provides for a letter of credit sub-facility not to exceed $25.0 million and a swing loan sub-facility initially not to exceed $20.0 million, subject to adjustment in accordance with the terms of the new credit agreement. ii-vi anticipates using the proceeds from the term a facility, together with 40 a separately committed term b loan facility in an aggregate principal amount of up to $720.0 million (the “term b facility”) and cash and short-term investments of ii-vi and finisar, to pay the cash portion of the merger consideration payable in connection with the merger and related fees and expenses. ii-vi currently does not intend to draw on the revolving credit facility in order to fund the cash portion of the merger consideration payable in connection with the merger. the funding obligations of the lenders under the new senior credit facilities are subject to certain currently unsatisfied conditions, including the consummation of the merger. accordingly, no borrowings are currently outstanding under the new senior credit facilities, and ii-vi currently is not able to borrow under the new senior credit facilities. further, ii-vi expects that the new credit agreement will be amended prior to the consummation of the merger to reflect syndication of the term b facility and to finalize certain other terms in the new credit agreement. upon the consummation of the merger, the new senior credit facilities, governed by the new credit agreement as it may be amended as of such time, will be used (i) to refinance in full the amended credit facility (as defined in note 9 to the company’s consolidated financial statements included in item 8 of this annual report on form 10-k) and (ii) on or after the date of the consummation of the merger, to repay amounts owed in connection with finisar’s outstanding convertible notes, currently in an aggregate principal amount outstanding of $575.0 million, including with the proceeds of a portion of the term a facility which will be available to ii-vi for a certain period after the initial funding under the new senior credit facilities. unless and until the merger is consummated and the other currently unsatisfied conditions to the funding obligations of the lenders under the new senior credit facilities are satisfied or waived, the amended credit facility remains in effect in accordance with its terms. critical accounting policies and estimates the preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the united states (“u.s. gaap”) and the company’s discussion and analysis of its financial condition and results of operations requires the company’s management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported in its consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. note 1 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements contained in item 8 of this annual report on form 10-k describes the significant accounting policies and accounting methods used in the preparation of the company’s consolidated financial statements. management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. actual results may differ from these estimates. management believes the company’s critical accounting estimates are those related to business combinations, impairment of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, and income taxes. management believes these estimates to be critical because they are both important to the portrayal of the company’s financial condition and results of operations, and they require management to make judgments and estimates about matters that are inherently uncertain. management has discussed the development and selection of these critical accounting policies and estimates with the audit committee of the board of directors and the audit committee has reviewed the related disclosure. in addition, there are other items within our consolidated financial statements that require estimation, but are not deemed critical as described above. changes in estimates used in these and other items could have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements. business combinations the company accounts for business acquisitions under the acquisition method of accounting whereby the total purchase price was allocated to tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on the respective fair values. the company believes that the accounting estimates related to business combinations are “critical accounting estimates” because the company must, in determining the fair value of assets acquired, make assumptions about the future performance of the acquired business, including among other things, the forecasted revenue attributable to the asset group. the valuation methodologies applied require the company to determine a risk-adjusted discount rate that is reflective of the level of risk associated with these estimates to discount the forward-looking estimates to present value. different assumptions may result in materially different values for these assets, which would impact the company’s financial position and future results of operations. 41 the company’s intangible assets are comprised of customer relationships and developed technology. the estimated fair value of the customer relationships and developed technology are determined using the multi-period excess earnings method and relief from royalty method, respectively. both methods require forward looking estimates that are discounted to determine the fair value of the intangible asset using a risk-adjusted discount rate that is reflective of the level of risk associated with future estimates associated with the asset group. goodwill and indefinite-lived intangibles the company tests goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment annually, and when events or changes in circumstances indicate that goodwill or indefinite-lived intangible assets might be impaired. other intangible assets are amortized over their estimated useful lives. the determination of the estimated useful lives of other intangible assets and whether goodwill or indefinite-lived intangibles are impaired requires us to make judgments based on long-term projections of future performance. estimates of fair value are based on our projection of revenues, operating costs and cash flows of each reporting unit, considering historical and anticipated results and general economic and market conditions and their projections. the fair values of the reporting units are determined using a discounted cash flow analysis based on historical and projected financial information as well as market analysis. the annual goodwill impairment analysis considers the financial projections of the reporting unit based on our most recently completed long-term strategic planning processes and also considers the current financial performance compared to our prior projections of the reporting unit. changes in our internal structuring, financial performance, judgments and projections could result in an impairment of goodwill or indefinite-lived intangible assets. as of june 30, 2019, no reporting units are at risk for impairment, as the fair value of the reporting units substantially exceeds the carrying values. the company has the option to perform a qualitative assessment of goodwill prior to completing the quantitative assessment described above, to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, including goodwill and other intangible assets. if the company concludes that this is the case, it must perform the quantitative assessment. otherwise, the company will forego the quantitative assessment process and does not need to perform any further testing. the company did not use the optional qualitative assessment during the years ended june 30, 2019 and 2018. as a result of the purchase price allocations from our acquisitions, and due to our decentralized structure, our goodwill is included in multiple reporting units which are the same as the company’s operating segments. due to the cyclical nature of our business, and the other factors described in the section on risk factors set forth in item 1a of this annual report on form 10-k, the profitability of our individual reporting units may periodically be affected by downturns in customer demand, operational challenges and other factors. these factors may have a relatively more pronounced impact on the individual reporting units as compared to the company as a whole, and might adversely affect the fair value of the individual reporting units. if material adverse conditions occur that impact one or more of our reporting units, our determination of future fair value might not support the carrying amount of one or more of our reporting units, and the related goodwill would need to be impaired. based upon our annual quantitative goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets impairment tests, the company did not record any impairment of goodwill or indefinite-lived intangible assets for the fiscal year ended june 30, 2019. income taxes the company prepares and files tax returns based on its interpretation of tax laws and regulations and records estimates based on these judgments and interpretations. in the normal course of business, the company’s tax returns are subject to examination by various taxing authorities, which may result in future tax, interest and penalty assessments by these authorities. inherent uncertainties exist in estimates of many tax positions due to changes in tax law resulting from legislation, regulation and/or as concluded through the various jurisdictions’ tax court systems. the company recognizes the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. the tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a position are measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate resolution. the amount of unrecognized tax benefits is adjusted for changes in facts and circumstances. for example, adjustments could result from significant amendments to existing tax law and the issuance of regulations or interpretations by the taxing authorities, new information obtained during a tax examination, or resolution of an examination. the company believes that its estimates for uncertain tax positions are appropriate and sufficient to pay assessments that may result from examinations of its tax returns. the company recognizes both accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense. management evaluates the realizability of deferred tax assets for each jurisdiction in which it operates. if the company experiences cumulative pretax income in a particular jurisdiction in a three-year period including the current and prior two years, management normally concludes that the income tax assets will more likely than not be realizable and no valuation allowance is recognized, unless known or planned operating developments, or changes in tax laws, would lead management to conclude otherwise. however, if the company experiences cumulative pretax losses in a particular jurisdiction in a three year period, management then considers a series 42 of factors in the determination of whether the deferred tax assets can be realized. the company has recorded valuation allowances against certain of its deferred tax assets, primarily those that have been generated from net operating losses in certain foreign taxing jurisdictions and acquired u.s. carryforwards. in evaluating whether the company would more likely than not recover these deferred tax assets, it has not assumed any future taxable income or tax planning strategies in the jurisdictions associated with these carry-forwards where history does not support such an assumption. implementation of tax planning strategies to recover these deferred tax assets or future income generation in these jurisdictions could lead to the reversal of these valuation allowances and a reduction of income tax expense. fiscal year 2019 compared to fiscal year 2018 the company aligns its organizational structure into the following three reporting segments for the purpose of making operational decisions and assessing financial performance: (i) ii-vi laser solutions, (ii) ii-vi photonics, and (iii) ii-vi performance products. the company is reporting financial information (revenue through operating income) for these reporting segments in this annual report on form 10-k. the following table sets forth select items from our consolidated statements of earnings for the years ended june 30, 2019 and 2018 ($ in millions except per share information): year ended year ended --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- june 30, 2019 june 30, 2018 % of % of revenues revenues total revenues $1,362.4 100.0 % $1,158.8 100.0 % cost of goods sold 841.1 61.7 696.6 60.1 gross margin 521.3 38.3 462.2 39.9 operating expenses: internal research and development 139.2 10.2 116.9 10.1 selling, general and administrative 233.5 17.1 208.6 18.0 interest and other, net 19.8 1.5 14.6 1.3 earnings before income tax 128.8 9.5 122.2 10.5 income taxes 21.3 1.6 34.2 3.0 net earnings $107.5 7.9 % $88.0 7.6 % diluted earnings per share $1.63 $1.35 executive summary net earnings for fiscal year 2019 were $107.5 million ($1.63 per-share diluted), compared to $88.0 million ($1.35 per-share diluted) for fiscal year 2018. the increase in net earnings during the current fiscal year from fiscal year 2018 was primarily driven by incremental margin realized on the 18% revenue increase due primarily to strong demand from customers in the optical communications market. offsetting the incremental margin on net earnings, the company realized increased investments in internal research and development during the current fiscal year addressing new product development in growing mega-trend markets as well as higher selling, general and administrative expenses supporting the growing revenue base. during the current fiscal year, the company incurred approximately $18.6 million in acquisition and integration expenses on its completed acquisitions as well as its pending acquisition of finisar, which is included in selling, general and administrative expenses. the company’s effective income tax rate of 16.6% was lower than the 28% effective tax rate for fiscal year 2018. the higher income tax rate in fiscal year 2018 was the result of the adoption of the tax act and the income tax expense associated with the transition tax. consolidated revenues. revenues for the year ended june 30, 2019 increased 18% to $1,362.4 million, compared to $1,158.8 million for the prior fiscal year. the increase in revenues during the current fiscal year was driven by strong demand from customers across the majority of the company’s business units. in particular, ii-vi photonics experienced a 31% revenue growth from the prior fiscal year, primarily driven by increased demand from customers in the optical communication market. specifically, the segment saw increased demand for roadm and other optical communication products addressing the growing deployment of 5g optical networks. ii-vi performance products recorded a 23% revenue increase during the current fiscal year, driven by strengthening demand for sic substrate products addressing rf electronics and high-power switching and power conversion systems for automotive and communication end markets. in addition, this segment also realized increased revenues from its aerospace and defense products addressing strengthening demand from customers in the intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance markets. 43 gross margin. gross margin for the year ended june 30, 2019 was $521.3 million, or 38.3%, of total revenues, compared to $462.2 million, or 39.9% of total revenues, for the same period last fiscal year. gross margin as a percentage of revenues decreased 160 basis points compared to the prior fiscal year despite the 18% increase in revenues during this same period. the company’s ii-vi photonic’s gross margin was negatively impacted by a shift in product mix to lower margin products while ii-vi laser solution’s experienced under-absorption of manufacturing costs for its 3d sensing product line due to continued delays in the program and underutilization of capacity. internal research and development. company-funded internal research and development (“ir&d”) expenses for the fiscal year ended june 30, 2019 were $139.2 million, or 10.2% of revenues, compared to $116.9 million, or 10.1% of revenues, last fiscal year. the increase in ir&d expenses is primarily due to the company continuing to invest in new products and processes across all its businesses including investments in 5g technology, 3d sensing and other engineered material applications. ir&d expenses as a percentage of revenues were consistent between both fiscal years, and the company anticipates this percentage to continue to range between 10% and 15% of revenues as the company continues investing in new product and process development. selling, general and administrative. selling, general and administrative (“sg&a”) expenses for the year ended june 30, 2019 were $233.5 million, or 17.1% of revenues, compared to $208.6 million, or 18.0% of revenues, last fiscal year. during fiscal year 2019, the company announced its intention to acquire finisar, and incurred approximately $15.6 million of related transaction expenses. in addition to the transaction expenses, the company incurred higher sg&a expenses to support its growing revenue base. the company has been successful in capitalizing on synergies from its recent acquisitions to improve its operating leverage. interest and other, net. interest and other, net for the year ended june 30, 2019 was expense of $19.8 million compared to expense of $14.6 million last fiscal year. included in interest and other, net were interest expense on long-term borrowings, earnings from equity investments, interest income on excess cash reserves, unrealized gains and losses on the company’s deferred compensation plan, and foreign currency gains and losses. the increase in interest and other, net was primarily due to increased interest expense during the current fiscal year of approximately $4.1 million due to the higher levels of outstanding debt. income taxes. the company’s year-to-date effective income tax rate at june 30, 2019 was 16.6%, compared to an effective tax rate of 28.0% last fiscal year. the prior fiscal year’s effective tax rate was negatively impacted by the u.s. enacted tax legislation and the recording the provision for the transition tax under the new tax law. segment reporting revenues and operating income for each of the company’s reportable segments are discussed below. operating income differs from income from operations in that operating income excludes certain operational expenses included in other expense (income) – net, as reported. management believes operating income to be a useful measure for investors, as it reflects the results of segment performance over which management has direct control and is used by management in its evaluation of segment performance. see note 14 to the company’s consolidated financial statements included in item 8 of this annual report on form 10-k for further information on the company’s reportable segments and for the reconciliation of operating income to net earnings, which is incorporated herein by reference. effective july 1, 2018, the company realigned its composition of its operating segments. the company moved laser systems group, from ii-vi laser solutions to ii-vi photonics and moved integrated photonics, inc. from ii-vi photonics to ii-vi performance products. all applicable segment infor mation has been restated to reflect this change. additionally, the company renamed laser systems group to ii-vi industrial laser. ii-vi laser solutions ($ in millions) year ended % ----------------------------------------------------------------------- june 30, decrease 2019 2018 revenues $396.6 $405.9 (2 %) operating income $40.3 $40.1 0 % revenues for the fiscal year ended june 30, 2019 for ii-vi laser solutions decreased 2% to $396.6 million, compared to revenues of $405.9 million last fiscal year. the decrease in revenues during the current fiscal year was the result of lower demand from industrial based customers for the company’s co2 and fiber laser optics and components. operating income for the fiscal year ended june 30, 2019 for ii-vi laser solutions of $40.3 million remained consistent compared to the last fiscal year. 44 ii-vi photonics ($ in millions) year ended % ---------------------------------------------------------------------- june 30, increase 2019 2018 revenues $638.8 $486.5 31 % operating income $81.9 $63.2 30 % the above operating results for the year ended june 30, 2019 include the company’s acquisitions of coadna in september 2018 and the product line which was acquired in november 2018. revenues for the year ended june 30, 2019 for ii-vi photonics increased 31% to $638.8 million, compared to $486.5 million for last fiscal year. included in the current year’s revenues were $12.4 million of revenues, excluding sales to customers through our sales offices, from the above acquisitions. exclusive of these acquisitions, the increase in revenues was primarily attributed to increased demand for optical communication products driven by the china broadband initiative as china continues to build out its broadband networks. specifically, the segment has seen increased demand for its roadm and edfa product lines to address this and other market demands, including the accelerating demand for 5g technology. operating income for the year ended june 30, 2019 for ii-vi photonics increased 30% to $81.9 million, compared to an operating income of $63.2 million last fiscal year. the increase in operating income was primarily due to incremental margin realized on increased revenues. ii-vi performance products ($ in millions) year ended % ---------------------------------------------------------------------- june 30, increase 2019 2018 revenues $327.0 $266.4 23 % operating income $42.2 $33.5 26 % the company’s ii-vi performance products segment includes the business units of ii-vi marlow, ii-vi m cubed, ii-vi advanced materials, ii-vi optical systems and ii-vi performance metals. revenues for the year ended june 30, 2019 for ii-vi performance products increased 23% to $327.0 million, compared to $266.4 million for last fiscal year. the increase in revenues during the current fiscal year was primarily driven by increased demand for sic products addressing rf electronics and high-power switching and power conversion systems for automotive and communication markets. in addition, the segment has seen increased demand for products and components for its thermoelectric and aerospace and defense markets. operating income for the year ended june 30, 2019 for ii-vi performance products increased 26% to $42.2 million, compared to $33.5 million for last fiscal year. the increase in operating income during the current fiscal year was primarily driven by incremental margin realized by increased sales volume, as well as favorable product mix toward higher margin products. 45 fiscal year 2018 compared to fiscal year 2017 the following table sets forth select items from our consolidated statements of earnings for the years ended june 30, 2018 and 2017. ($ millions, except per share information): year ended year ended ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- june 30, 2018 june 30, 2017 % of % of revenues revenues total revenues $1,158.8 100.0 % $972.0 100.0 % cost of goods sold 696.6 60.1 583.7 60.1 gross margin 462.2 39.9 388.3 39.9 operating expenses: internal research and development 116.9 10.1 96.8 10.0 selling, general and administrative 208.6 18.0 176.0 18.1 interest and other, net 14.6 1.3 (3.3 ) (0.3 ) earnings before income tax 122.2 10.5 118.8 12.2 income taxes 34.2 3.0 23.5 2.4 net earnings $88.0 7.6 % $95.3 9.8 % diluted earnings per shares $1.35 $1.48 consolidated revenues. revenues for the year ended june 30, 2018 increased 19% to $1,158.8 million, compared to $972.0 million for the fiscal year ended june 30, 2017. the increase in revenues during fiscal year 2018 were driven by strong demand from customers across all of the company’s business segments. in particular, ii-vi laser solution realized a 26% revenue growth from the fiscal year 2017, driven by increased demand from industrial based customers for co2, fiber and direct diode optics and components. this segment also recorded increased shipments of its vcsels products addressing the growing consumer electronics, datacom and other developing end markets. ii-vi performance products recorded a 24% revenue increase during fiscal year 2018, driven by strengthening demand for sic substrate products addressing rf electronics and high-power switching and power conversion systems for automotive, communication and aerospace and defense markets. gross margin. gross margin as a percentage of revenues for the year ended june 30, 2018 was $462.2 million, or 39.9%, compared to $388.3 million, or 39.9%, for the fiscal year ended june 30, 2017. gross margin as a percentage of revenues was consistent with the fiscal year 2017 due to a balance of operating efficiencies and investments to expand capacity. the company’s ii-vi photonic’s gross margin was negatively impacted by both product mix and the effects of foreign currency. internal research and development. company-funded internal research and development expenses for the year ended june 30, 2018 were $116.9 million, or 10.1% of revenues, compared to $96.8 million, or 10.0% of revenues, for the fiscal year ended june 30, 2017. the increase in ir&d expenses is primarily the result of the acquisition of kaiam laser limited, acquired in august 2017, which contributed $14.6 million of expense. selling, general and administrative. sg&a expenses for the fiscal year ended june 30, 2018 were $208.6 million, or 18.0% of revenues, compared to $176.0 million, or 18.1% of revenues, for the fiscal year ended june 30, 2017. sg&a expenses includes $3.7 million and $2.5 million, respectively, for the combined acquisitions of ii-vi integrated photonics inc. (“ipi”), acquired in june 2017, and kaiam laser limited, acquired in august 2017. exclusive of these acquisitions, the increase in sg&a expenses is primarily due to increased operating costs to support the company’s growing revenue and infrastructure base, as well as its ongoing merger and acquisition strategy. interest and other, net. interest and other, net for the year ended june 30, 2018 was expense of $14.6 million compared to income of $3.3 million for the year ended june 30, 2017. interest expense increased $11.5 million due to the higher levels of the company’s outstanding debt. the majority of the interest expense increase was related to the company’s $345.0 million aggregate principal amount of convertible notes issued in august 2017. the company recognized $10.8 million of interest and amortization of debt discounts and issuance costs. other income during fiscal year 2017 included approximately $7.0 million of income from earn-out and technology transfer agreements from the company’s sale of its anadigics’ rf business. 46 income taxes. the company’s year-to-date effective income tax rate at june 30, 2018 was 28.0%, compared to an effective tax rate of 19.8% at june 30, 2017. the variation between the company’s effective tax rate and the u.s. statutory rate was primarily due to the company’s foreign operations, which are subject to income taxes at lower statutory rates. the increase in the fiscal year 2018’s effective tax rate is the result of approximately $8.0 million of increased income tax expense relating to repatriation on foreign source earnings. ii-vi laser solutions ($ in millions) year ended % june 30, increase 2018 2017 revenues $405.9 $317.5 28 % operating income $40.1 $27.5 46 % the company’s ii-vi laser solutions segment includes the combined operations of ii-vi infrared optics, ii-vi highyag, ii-vi laser enterprise, ii-vi laser systems group, ii-vi oed, ii-vi epiworks, and kaiam laser limited (now operating under ii-vi compound semiconductors, ltd.). the company acquired ii-vi compound semiconductors, ltd. in august 2017. revenues for the year ended june 30, 2018 for ii-vi laser solutions increased 28% to $405.9 million, compared to $317.5 million for fiscal year ended june 30, 2017. the increase in revenues from fiscal year 2017 was the result of increased demand from industrial based customers for the company’s co2, fiber and direct diode laser optics and components. in addition, the segment has also seen increased demand for its cvd diamond optics used in the euv lithography markets, as well as vcsels used in consumer electronics, datacom and other end markets. operating income for the year ended june 30, 2018 for ii-vi laser solutions increased 46% to $40.1 million, compared to $27.5 million for fiscal year june 30, 2017. the increase in operating income during fiscal year 2018 was the result of incremental margins realized from increased capacity utilization, increase in mix of higher margin products, offset somewhat by greater investment in growth markets. ii-vi photonics ($ in millions) % ------------------------------------------------------------------------- year ended increase june 30, (decrease) 2018 2017 revenues $486.5 $440.4 10 % operating income $63.2 $66.5 (5 %) the company’s ii-vi photonics segment includes the combined operations of ii-vi photop and ii-vi optical communications. the above operating results for the year ended june 30, 2018 include the company’s acquisition of ipi, which was acquired in june 2017. revenues for the year ended june 30, 2018 for ii-vi photonics increased 10% to $486.5 million, compared to $440.4 million for the fiscal year ended june 30, 2017. exclusive of ipi, the increase in revenues was primarily attributed to increased demand of optics and optic assemblies for applications for industrial laser products. in addition, the segment realized increased demand for transport and amplification component products, including its 980 nm pumps. operating income for the year ended june 30, 2018 for ii-vi photonics decreased 5% to $63.2 million, compared to an operating income of $66.5 million for the fiscal year ended june 30, 2017. the increase in operating income was primarily due to incremental margin realized on increased revenues but significantly offset by mix shifts and negative foreign exchange effects. 47 ii-vi performance products ($ in millions) year ended % ---------------------------------------------------------------------- june 30, increase 2018 2017 revenues $266.4 $214.2 24 % operating income $33.5 $21.6 55 % the company’s ii-vi performance products segment includes the business units of ii-vi marlow, ii-vi m cubed, ii-vi advanced materials, ii-vi optical systems and ii-vi performance metals. revenues for the year ended june 30, 2018 for ii-vi performance products increased 24% to $266.4 million, compared to $214.2 million for fiscal year june 30, 2017. the increase in revenues during the fiscal year 2018 was primarily driven by increased demand for sic products addressing rf electronics and high-power switching and power conversion systems for automotive and communication markets. in addition, the segment saw increased demand for products and components for the semiconductor capital equipment and aerospace and defense markets. operating income for the year ended june 30, 2018 for ii-vi performance products increased 55% to $33.5 million, compared to $21.6 million for fiscal year june 30, 2017. the increase in operating income during fiscal year 2018 was primarily driven by incremental margin realized by increased sales volume, as well as favorable product mix toward higher margin products. liquidity and capital resources historically, our primary sources of cash have been provided through operations and long-term borrowings. other sources of cash include proceeds received from the exercise of stock options and sales of equity investments and businesses. our historical uses of cash have been for capital expenditures, investments in research and development, business acquisitions, payments of principal and interest on outstanding debt obligations, debt issuance costs, payments in satisfaction of employees’ minimum tax obligations and purchases of treasury stock. supplemental information pertaining to our sources and uses of cash is presented as follows: sources (uses) of cash (millions): year ended june 30, 2019 2018 2017 ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- net cash provided by operating activities $178.5 $161.0 $118.6 net proceeds on long-term borrowings 15.0 153.0 104.0 proceeds from exercises of stock options 8.7 10.5 15.1 additions to property, plant equipment (137.1 ) (153.4 ) (138.5 ) purchases of businesses, net of cash acquired (83.1 ) (80.5 ) (40.0 ) payments in satisfaction of employees' minimum tax obligations (7.1 ) (6.6 ) (4.1 ) debt issuance costs (5.6 ) (10.1 ) - purchases of equity investments (4.5 ) (52.1 ) - payment on earnout consideration (4.5 ) - (2.0 ) purchases of treasury stock (1.6 ) (49.9 ) - effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents and other (0.8 ) 3.2 0.3 net cash provided by operating activities: net cash provided by operating activities was $178.5 million and $161.0 million for the fiscal years ended june 30, 2019 and 2018, respectively. the increase in cash provided by operations during the current fiscal year was due to a combination of higher net earnings as well as non-cash items such as depreciation, amortization, and share-based compensation expense and improved working capital management of accounts payable. net cash provided by operating activities was $161.0 million and $118.6 million for the fiscal years ended june 30, 2018 and 2017, respectively. the increase in cash provided by operating activities during fiscal year 2018 was due to a combination of higher net earnings as well as non-cash items such as depreciation, amortization and share-based compensation expense and better working capital management of accounts payable, income tax payable and other operating net assets. 48 net cash used in investing activities: net cash used in investing activities was $224.0 million and $285.0 million for the fiscal years ended june 30, 2019 and 2018, respectively. the decrease in cash used in investing activities was the result of lower level of investments in property, plant & equipment as the company continues to strategically allocate resources. net cash used in investing activities was $285.0 million and $177.2 million for the fiscal years ended june 30, 2018 and 2017, respectively. the increase in cash used in investing activities was the result of higher level of investments in property, plant & equipment to continue to build capacity to meet the growing demand for the company’s product portfolio. in addition, the company completed several strategic investments in both wholly and majority owned investments during fiscal year 2018, totaling approximately $132.6 million. net cash provided by financing activities: net cash provided by financing activities was $4.9 million for the year ended june 30, 2019 compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $97.0 million for the year ended june 30, 2018. during the current fiscal year, the company had net borrowings of $15.0 million. the company realized $8.7 million of proceeds received from the exercise of stock options offset, by $7.1 million of cash payments in satisfaction of employees’ minimum tax obligations on the vesting of the company’s restricted and performance shares during the current fiscal year. in addition, the company incurred approximately $1.6 million of purchases of treasury stock and $5.6 million of debt issuance costs associated with its pending financing of the cash consideration payable in connection with its finisar acquisition. net cash provided by financing activities was $97.0 million for the year ended june 30, 2018 compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $111.6 million for the year ended june 30, 2017. during fiscal year 2018, the company completed its offering and sale of $345 million aggregate principal amount of convertible notes. in addition, the company borrowed $100.0 million on its revolving credit facility to fund investments in capital expenditures and research and development to address new and growing technology platforms. the net proceeds from the convertible debt offering as well as cash generated from operations was used to repay $272.0 million on the company’s revolving credit facility under the amended credit facility (as defined below), $20.0 million on the company’s term loan under the amended credit facility and $10.1 million of convertible debt issuance costs. the company also utilized $49.9 million of net proceeds from its offering and sale of its convertible notes to repurchase 1,414,900 shares of its common stock. the company realized $10.5 million of proceeds received from exercises of stock options, offset by $6.6 million of cash payments in satisfaction of employees’ minimum tax obligations on the vesting of the company’s restricted and performance shares during fiscal year 2018. 0.25% convertible senior notes on august 24, 2017, the company entered into a purchase agreement with merrill lynch, pierce, fenner & smith incorporated, as representative of the several initial purchasers named therein (collectively, the “initial purchasers”), to issue and sell $300 million aggregate principal amount of our 0.25% convertible senior notes due 2022 (the "notes") in a private placement to qualified institutional buyers within the meaning of rule 144a under the securities act of 1933, as amended. in addition, we granted the initial purchasers a 30-day option to purchase up to an additional $45 million aggregate principal amount of the notes (the “over-allotment option”). on august 29, 2017, the initial purchasers exercised their over-allotment option to purchase the entire $45 million in aggregate principal amount of additional notes. the notes mature on september 1, 2022, unless earlier repurchased by the company or converted by holders in accordance with the terms of the notes. interest is payable semi-annually in arrears on march 1 and september 1 of each year, beginning on march 1, 2018. the sale of the notes to the initial purchasers settled on august 29, 2017, and resulted in approximately $336 million in net proceeds to the company after deducting the initial purchasers’ discount and the offering expenses. the net proceeds from the offering and sale of the notes were used, in part, to repurchase approximately $49.9 million of our common stock. the company used the remaining net proceeds to repay $252 million on its revolving credit facility and to pay debt issuance costs of $10.1 million. the notes are governed by an indenture between the company, as issuer, and u.s. bank, national association, as trustee. the notes are our senior unsecured obligations and rank senior in right of payment to any of our indebtedness that is expressly subordinated in right of payment to the notes; equal in right of payment to any of our indebtedness that is not so subordinated; effectively junior in right of payment to any of our secured indebtedness to the extent of the value of the assets securing such indebtedness; and structurally junior to all indebtedness and other liabilities (including trade payables) of our subsidiaries. in the event of our bankruptcy, liquidation, reorganization or other winding up, our assets that secure secured debt will be available to pay obligations on the notes only after all indebtedness under such secured debt has been repaid in full from such assets. upon conversion, the company will pay or deliver, as the case may be, cash, shares of our common stock or a combination of cash and shares of our common stock, at the company’s election. 49 as a result of our cash conversion option, the company separately accounted for the value of the embedded conversion option as a debt discount. the value of the embedded conversion option was determined based on the estimated fair value of the debt without the conversion feature, which was determined using an expected present value technique (income approach) to estimate the fair value of similar nonconvertible debt; the debt discount is being amortized as additional non-cash interest expense over the term of the notes using the effective interest method with an effective interest rate of 4.5% per annum. the equity component is not remeasured as long as it continues to meet the conditions for equity classification. the initial conversion rate is 21.25 shares of common stock per $1,000 principal amount of notes, which is equivalent to an initial conversion price of $47.06 per share of common stock. throughout the term of the notes, the conversion rate may be adjusted upon the occurrence of certain events. the if-converted value of the notes amounted to $268 million as of june 30, 2019 (based on the company’s closing stock price on the last trading day of the year ended june 30, 2019). holders of the notes will not receive any cash payment representing accrued and unpaid interest upon conversion of a note. accrued but unpaid interest will be deemed to be paid in full upon conversion rather than cancelled, extinguished or forfeited. prior to the close of business on the business day immediately preceding june 1, 2022, the notes will be convertible only upon satisfaction of at least one of the conditions as follows: a) during any fiscal quarter (and only during such fiscal quarter), if the last reported sale price of our common stock for at least 20 trading days (whether or not consecutive) during a period of 30 consecutive trading days ending on the last trading day of the immediately preceding quarter is greater than or equal to 130% of the conversion price on each applicable trading day; ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- b) during the five business day period after any five consecutive trading day period (the “measurement period”) in which the trading price per $1,000 principal amount of notes for each trading day of the measurement period was less than 98% of the product of the last reported sale price of our common stock and the conversion rate on each such trading day; or -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- c) upon the occurrence of specified corporate events. ------------------------------------------------------- on or after june 1, 2022 until the close of business on the business day immediately preceding the maturity date, holders may convert all or any portion of their notes, in multiples of $1,000 principal amount, at the option of the holder regardless of the foregoing circumstances. as of june 30, 2019, the notes are not convertible. the notes will become convertible upon the satisfaction of at least one of the above conditions. in accounting for the transaction costs related to the note issuance, the company allocated the total amount of offering costs incurred to the debt and equity components based on their relative values. offering costs attributable to the debt component, totaling $8.4 million, are being amortized as non-cash interest expense over the term of the notes, and offering costs attributable to the equity component, totaling $1.7 million, were recorded within shareholders' equity. the company was in compliance with all the covenants set forth under the indenture as of june 30, 2019. the following table sets forth total interest expense recognized related to the notes for the fiscal years ended june 30, 2019 and 2018 (representing an effective interest rate of 4.5%): year ended june 30, 2019 2018 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 0.25% contractual coupon $874 $731 amortization of debt discount and debt issuance costs including initial purchaser discount 12,550 10,058 interest expense $13,424 $10,789 the unamortized discount amounted to $38.3 million as of june 30, 2019 and is being amortized over the remaining period of three years. amended credit facility on july 28, 2016, the company amended and restated its existing credit agreement. the third amended and restated credit agreement (the “amended credit facility”) provides for a revolving credit facility of $325 million, as well as a $100 million term loan. the term loan is being repaid in consecutive quarterly principal payments on the first business day of each january, april, july and october, with the first payment having commenced on october 1, 2016, as follows: (i) twenty consecutive quarterly installments of $5 million and (ii) a final installment of all remaining principal due and payable on the maturity date of july 27, 2021. amounts borrowed under the revolving credit facility are due and payable on the maturity date. the amended credit facility is unsecured, but 50 is guaranteed by each existing and subsequently acquired or organized wholly-owned domestic subsidiary of the company. the company has the option to request an increase to the size of the revolving credit facility in an aggregate additional amount not to exceed $100 million. the amended credit facility has a five-year term through july 27, 2021 and has an interest rate of either a base rate option or a euro-rate option, plus an applicable margin, as defined in the agreement governing the amended credit facility. if the base rate option is selected for a borrowing, the applicable margin is 0.00% to 1.25% and if the euro-rate option is selected for a borrowing, the applicable margin is 1.00% to 2.25%. the applicable margin is based on the ratio of the company’s consolidated indebtedness to consolidated ebitda. additionally, the amended credit facility is subject to certain covenants, including those relating to minimum interest coverage and maximum leverage ratios. as of june 30, 2019, the company was in compliance with all financial covenants under its amended credit facility. yen loan the company’s yen denominated line of credit is a 500 million yen ($4.6 million) facility. the yen line of credit matures in august 2020. the interest rate is equal to libor, as defined in the loan agreement, plus 0.625% to 1.75%. at june 30, 2019 and 2018, the company had 300 million yen outstanding under the line of credit. additionally, the facility is subject to certain covenants, including those relating to minimum interest coverage and maximum leverage ratios. as of june 30, 2019, the company had $2.8 million outstanding and was in compliance with all covenants under its yen facility. aggregate availability the company had aggregate availability of $211.9 million and $246.4 million under its lines of credit as of june 30, 2019 and 2018, respectively. the amounts available under the company’s lines of credit are reduced by outstanding letters of credit. total outstanding letters of credit supported by the credit facilities were immaterial for fiscal year 2019 and $0.4 million for fiscal year 2018, respectively. weighted average interest rate the weighted average interest rate of total borrowings was 1.6% and 1.3% for the years ended june 30, 2019 and 2018, respectively. the weighted average of total borrowings for the fiscal years ended june 30, 2019 and 2018 was $533.9 million and $476.6 million, respectively. share repurchase programs in august 2017, in conjunction with the company’s offering and sale of the notes, the company’s board of directors authorized the company to purchase up to $50 million of its common stock with a portion of the net proceeds received from the offering and sale of the notes. the shares that were purchased by the company pursuant to this authorization were retained as treasury stock and are available for general corporate purposes. the company purchased 1,414,900 shares of its common stock for approximately $49.9 million pursuant to this authorization. in august 2014, the company’s board of directors authorized the company to purchase up to $50 million of its common stock through a share repurchase program (the “program”) that calls for shares to be purchased in the open market or in private transactions from time to time. the program has no expiration and may be suspended or discontinued at any time. shares purchased by the company are retained as treasury stock and available for general corporate purposes. as of june 30, 2019, the company has cumulatively purchased 1,366,587 shares of its common stock pursuant to the program for approximately $20.7 million. our cash position, borrowing capacity and debt obligations are as follows (in millions): june 30, june 30, ---------------------------------------------------------------- 2019 2018 cash and cash equivalents $204.9 $247.0 available borrowing capacity 211.9 246.4 total debt obligations 467.0 439.0 the company believes cash flow from operations, existing cash reserves and available borrowing capacity from its credit facilities will be sufficient to fund its needs for working capital, capital expenditures, repayment of scheduled long-term borrowings and capital lease obligations, investments in internal research and development, share repurchases, acquisition and integration expenses for the pending finisar acquisition, and internal and external growth objectives at least through fiscal year 2020. 51 the company’s cash and cash equivalent balances are generated and held in numerous locations throughout the world, including amounts held outside the united states. as of june 30, 2019, the company held approximately $173 million of cash and cash equivalents outside of the united states. cash balances held outside the united states could be repatriated to the united states. the tax act created significant changes to the taxation of undistributed foreign earnings and has changed our future intentions regarding repatriation of earnings. off-balance sheet arrangements the company’s off-balance sheet arrangements include the operating lease obligations and the purchase obligations disclosed in the contractual obligations table below, as well as letters of credit as discussed in note 9 to the company’s consolidated financial statements included in item 8 of this annual report on form 10-k. the company enters into these off-balance sheet arrangements to acquire goods and services used in its business. tabular disclosure of contractual obligations payments due by period ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- less than 1 1-3 3-5 more than 5 contractual obligations total year years years years ($000) long-term debt obligations $511,617 $23,834 $142,783 $345,000 $- interest payments(1) 25,321 8,590 10,134 2,394 4,203 capital lease obligation 24,360 1,021 2,426 3,000 17,913 operating lease obligations(2) 119,900 23,000 32,000 20,900 44,000 purchase obligations(3)(4) 37,012 32,048 4,964 - - total $718,210 $88,493 $192,307 $371,294 $66,116 (1) interest payments represent both variable and fixed rate interest obligations based on the interest rate in place at june 30, 2019, relating to the amended credit facility, the notes and interest relating to the company’s capital lease obligation. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- (2) includes an obligation for the use of three parcels of land related to ii-vi performance metals. the lease obligations extend through years 2039, 2056, and 2061, respectively. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- (3) a purchase obligation is defined as an agreement to purchase goods or services that is enforceable and legally binding on the company and that specifies all significant terms, including fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; minimum or variable price provisions, and the approximate timing of the transaction. these amounts are primarily comprised of open purchase order commitments to vendors for the purchase of supplies and materials. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- (4) includes cash earn out opportunities based on certain acquisitions’ achieving agreed-upon financial, operational and technology targets, and the value of the net purchase option for the company’s equity investment in a privately held company. -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- pension obligations are not included in the table above. the company expects defined benefit plan employer contributions to be $3.0 million in 2020. estimated funding obligations are determined by asset performance, workforce and retiree demographics, tax and employment laws and other actuarial assumptions which may change the annual funding obligations. the funded status of our defined benefit plans is disclosed in note 17 to the company’s consolidated financial statements included in item 8 of this annual report on form 10-k. the gross unrecognized income tax benefits at june 30, 2019, which are excluded from the above table, were $12.7 million. the company is not able to reasonably estimate the amount by which the liability will increase or decrease over time; however, at this time, the company does not expect a significant payment related to these obligations within the next fiscal year. 52