item 7. management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations the following section discusses management's view of the financial condition and results of operations of fis and its consolidated subsidiaries as of december 31, 2024 and 2023, and for the years ended december 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, unless otherwise noted. this section should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this annual report. management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations contains forward-looking statements. see "statement regarding forward-looking information" and "risk factors" in item 1a of this annual report for a discussion of the uncertainties, risks and assumptions associated with these forward-looking statements that could cause future results to differ materially from those reflected in this section. business trends and conditions revenue sources and markets our revenue from continuing operations is primarily derived from a combination of technology and processing solutions, transaction processing fees, professional services and software license fees. while we are a global company and do business around the world, the majority of our revenue is generated by clients in the u.s. the majority of our international revenue is generated by clients in the u.k., germany, canada, australia, brazil, switzerland and france. in addition, the majority of our revenue has historically been recurring under multi-year banking and capital markets contracts that contribute relative stability to our revenue stream. these solutions, in general, are considered critical to our clients' operations. professional services revenue is typically non-recurring, though recognition often occurs over time rather than at a point in time. sales of software licenses are typically non-recurring with point-in-time recognition and are less predictable. economic trends we are experiencing relatively stable sales cycles and levels of client activity across our businesses. we have experienced, and continue to experience, relatively high inflation in our primary markets over the medium-term cycle. relatively high interest rates have had, and may continue to have, a negative impact on our interest expense. however, during 2024, we used a portion of the net proceeds from the worldpay sale to repay our borrowings under our commercial paper programs and reduce our long-term debt, which has decreased our interest expense from previous levels. impacts of foreign currency fluctuations remained slightly favorable during 2024. given the volatility of exchange rates and the mix of currencies involved in both revenues and expenses, the direction and magnitude of future effects of currency fluctuations are uncertain. worldpay sale on january 31, 2024, the company completed the worldpay sale for cash consideration in a transaction valuing the worldpay merchant solutions business at an enterprise value of $18.5 billion, including $1.0 billion of consideration contingent on the returns realized by buyer exceeding certain thresholds. the net cash proceeds received by fis at the closing were greater than $12 billion, net of estimated closing adjustments, debt restructuring fees, taxes and transaction costs. we used a portion of the proceeds from the sale to retire debt and repurchase shares, and we plan to continue to use the remaining proceeds to return additional capital to shareholders through our existing share repurchase authorizations, as well as for general corporate purposes, including acquisitions, while maintaining an investment grade credit rating. in connection with the worldpay sale, fis and worldpay entered into commercial agreements, preserving a key value proposition for clients of both businesses and minimizing potential dis-synergies. fis and worldpay also entered into additional agreements as described in note 4 to the consolidated financial statements. upon closing of the worldpay sale, we retained a non-controlling 45% equity interest in worldpay. fis' share of the net income of worldpay subsequent to the sale is reported as equity method investment earnings (loss), net of tax. as a result of the worldpay sale, we recorded an estimated loss on sale of $578 million during 2024. we also recorded a tax benefit of $1.1 billion, primarily from the release of u.s. deferred tax liabilities that were not transferred in the worldpay sale, net of the estimated u.s. tax cost that we expect to incur as a result of the worldpay sale. completion of remaining purchase agreement provisions in connection with the worldpay sale could result in further adjustments to the loss on sale amount and the estimated u.s. tax cost. investments in innovation we continue to assist financial institutions and other businesses in migrating to outsourced integrated technology solutions to improve their profitability and address increasing and ongoing regulatory requirements. we believe our integrated solutions and outsourced services are well-positioned to address this outsourcing trend across the markets we serve. we continue to invest in modernization, innovation and integrated solutions to meet the demands of the markets we serve and to compete with global banks, financial and other technology providers, and emerging technology innovators. we invest both internally and through investment opportunities in companies building complementary technologies in the financial services space. our internal development activities have related primarily to the modernization of our proprietary core systems in each of our segments, design and development of next-generation digital and innovative solutions and development of processing systems and related software applications and risk management platforms. we expect to continue to invest an appropriate level of resources to maintain, enhance and extend the functionality of our proprietary systems and existing software applications, to develop new and innovative software applications and systems to address emerging technology trends in response to the needs of our clients, and to enhance the capabilities of our outsourcing infrastructure. digital one platform consumer preference, particularly in younger generations, continues to shift from traditional branch banking services to digital-first banking solutions. it is increasingly clear that a priority for our clients is to provide a unified, engaging and inclusive banking experience powered by digital capabilities across all channels and customer activities. our digital one platform helps our clients, from top-tier large financial institutions with over $10 billion in assets to top-tier and mid-tier community banks, provide a set of modern digital solutions to support all customer types, including retail consumers, sole proprietors, small businesses and large corporations, through any channel, including desktop, tablet, smartphone, and branch. the uniform customer experience extends to support a broad range of financial services including opening new accounts, servicing existing accounts, money movement, and personal financial management, as well as other consumer, small business and commercial banking capabilities. the digital one platform is host-agnostic, and our digital suite has been enabled across multiple fis core banking platforms, including ibs, horizon, modern banking platform, affinityedge, and systematics, in addition to non-fis platforms run by banking financial institutions who demand market-leading digital capabilities. banking industry consolidation consolidation within the banking industry has occurred and may continue to occur, primarily in the form of merger and acquisition activity among financial institutions, which generally increases competition among financial technology providers. however, consolidation resulting from specific merger and acquisition transactions may be beneficial to our business. when consolidations of financial institutions occur, merger partners often operate systems obtained from competing service providers. the newly formed entity generally makes a determination to migrate its core and payments systems to a single platform. when a financial institution processing client is involved in a consolidation, we may benefit if the client retains our solutions and expands the use of them following the consolidation to support the newly combined entity. conversely, we may lose revenue if we are providing solutions to both entities, or if a client of ours is involved in a consolidation and our solutions are not chosen to support the newly combined entity. it is also possible that larger financial institutions resulting from consolidation may have greater leverage in negotiating terms or could decide to perform in-house some or all of the solutions that we currently provide or could provide. we seek to mitigate the risks of consolidations by offering other competitive solutions to take advantage of specific opportunities at the surviving company. demand in payments market we continue to see demand in the payments market for innovative solutions that will deliver faster, more convenient payment options in mobile channels, internet applications, in-store cards, and digital currencies. the payment processing industry is adopting new technologies, developing new solutions, evolving new business models, and is being affected by new market entrants and by an evolving regulatory environment. as financial institutions respond to these changes by seeking solutions to help them enhance their own offerings to consumers, including the ability to accept card-not-present payments in ecommerce and mobile environments, as well as contactless cards and mobile wallets at the point of sale, fis believes that payment processors will seek to develop additional capabilities in order to serve clients' evolving needs. to facilitate this expansion, we believe that payment processors will need to enhance their technology platforms so they can deliver these capabilities and differentiate their offerings from other providers. we believe that these market changes present both an opportunity and a risk for us, and we cannot predict which emerging technologies or solutions will be successful. however, fis believes that payment processors, like fis, that have scalable, integrated business models, provide solutions across the payment processing value chain and utilize broad distribution capabilities will be best-positioned to enable emerging alternative electronic payment technologies in the long term. further, fis believes that its depth of capabilities and breadth of distribution will enhance its position as emerging payment technologies are adopted by merchants and other businesses. fis' ability to partner with non-financial institution enterprises, such as mobile payment providers and internet, retail and social media companies, continues to create attractive growth opportunities as these new entrants seek to become more active participants in the development of alternative electronic payment technologies and to facilitate the convergence of retail, online, mobile and social commerce applications. 32 cybersecurity threats and solutions cyberattacks on information technology systems and the vendors and technological supply chain on which they rely continue to grow in frequency, complexity and sophistication. this is a trend we expect to continue with widespread impacts, including potentially some pertinent to fis. the continued growth in the frequency, complexity and sophistication of cyberattacks, coupled with the continued interconnection in the global technology ecosystem, present both a threat and an opportunity for fis. using expertise we have gained from our ongoing focus and investment, we have developed and we offer fraud, security, risk management and compliance solutions to target this growth opportunity in the financial services industry. we also use certain of these solutions to manage our own risks. see item 1c for additional discussion of how the company assesses, identifies, and manages cybersecurity risks. critical accounting policies and estimates the accounting policies and estimates described below are those we consider critical in preparing our consolidated financial statements. these policies require management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures with respect to contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting periods. actual amounts could differ from those estimates. see note 2 to the consolidated financial statements for a more detailed description of the significant accounting policies that have been followed in preparing our consolidated financial statements. revenue recognition application of gaap related to the measurement and recognition of revenue requires us to make judgments and estimates. specifically, complex arrangements with nonstandard terms and conditions may require significant contract interpretation in the determination of distinct performance obligations. other judgments may include the evaluation of the standalone selling price for each performance obligation and whether separate contracts with the same customer should be combined and considered part of one arrangement. the determination as to whether individual promised solutions or services can be considered distinct or should instead be combined with other promised solutions or services in a contract may require judgment. we assess the solutions and services promised in our contracts with customers and identify a performance obligation for each promise to transfer to the customer a solution or service (or bundle of solutions or services) that is distinct - i.e., if a solution or service is separately identifiable from other items in the bundled package and if a customer can benefit from it on its own or with other resources that are readily available to the customer. due to the large number, broad nature and average size of our individual customer contracts, the impact of judgments and assumptions that we apply in recognizing revenue for any single contract is not likely to have a material effect on our consolidated operations or financial position. however, the accounting policies that we apply across similar contracts, products or classes of clients could significantly influence the timing and amount of revenue recognized in our historical and future results of operations or financial position. purchase accounting we allocate the purchase price of acquired businesses to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed in business combination transactions at their estimated fair values, except as otherwise required. any portion of the purchase price in excess of the recorded amount of the net identifiable assets acquired is recognized as goodwill. the estimates used to determine the fair value of long-lived assets, such as customer relationships and software intangible assets, are complex and require a significant amount of management judgment. when necessary, we engage third-party valuation specialists to assist us in making these fair value determinations. we generally use discounted cash flow models, which require internally developed assumptions, to determine the acquisition fair value of customer relationship intangible assets and developed technology software assets. assumptions for customer relationship asset valuations typically include forecasted revenue attributable to existing customer contracts and relationships, estimated annual attrition, forecasted margin, and estimated weighted average cost of capital and discount rates. assumptions for software asset valuations typically include forecasted revenue attributable to the software assets, obsolescence rates, estimated royalty rates and estimated weighted average cost of capital and discount rates. the forecasted revenue and margins used in the discounted cash flow models are critical estimates in determining the fair value of customer relationships and developed technology software assets as these estimates are influenced by many factors including historical financial information and management’s expectation for future operating results as a combined company. 33 while we use our best estimates and assumptions to determine the fair values of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed, our estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. as a result, during the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, we record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed. upon the conclusion of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to our consolidated statements of earnings. during the year ended december 31, 2024, we had three acquisitions that were accounted for as business combinations, as discussed in note 5 to the consolidated financial statements. we had no material business combinations, individually or in the aggregate, during the years ended december 31, 2023 and 2022. goodwill impairment the company assesses goodwill for impairment by reporting unit on an annual basis during the fourth quarter or more frequently if circumstances indicate potential impairment. our reporting units are the same as our primary operating segments, with additional reporting units, as applicable, for certain non-strategic businesses within the corporate and other segment. goodwill impairment assessments require a significant amount of management judgment, and a meaningful change in one or more of the underlying forecasts, estimates, or assumptions used in testing goodwill for impairment could result in a material impact on the company's financial position or results of operations. based on the results of our assessments, goodwill of the reporting units in our continuing operations was not impaired in any of the periods presented. our annual impairment test may first consider qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that a reporting unit's carrying amount exceeds its fair value. qualitative factors include macroeconomic conditions, industry and market conditions, cost factors, overall financial performance and events affecting the reporting unit or company as a whole, including a sustained decrease in stock price. as a result of the qualitative assessment, if we conclude that it is more likely than not that the reporting unit's fair value is less than its carrying amount as a result of the qualitative assessment, or we elect to bypass the qualitative assessment for a reporting unit, then we must perform a quantitative assessment for that reporting unit. when a quantitative assessment is triggered or elected, we typically engage third-party valuation specialists to assist us in determining the fair value of the reporting unit based on the weighted average of two valuation techniques: an income approach (also known as the discounted cash flow method) and a market approach. the income approach calculates a value based upon the present value of estimated future cash flows, while the market approach uses earnings multiples of similarly situated guideline public companies. the income approach involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions regarding forecasted revenue, growth rates, operating margins, capital expenditures, and other factors used to calculate estimated future cash flows. in addition, risk-adjusted discount rates and future economic and market conditions and other assumptions are applied. the market approach involves the selection of guideline public companies and earnings multiples considering factors such as markets of operation, solutions offered, and risk profiles. the income approach used to assess goodwill for impairment is a critical estimate because the forecasted revenue growth rate and margin assumptions (including long-term growth assumptions) underlying the estimated future cash flows are subject to management’s judgment based upon the best available market information, internal forecasts and operating plans. a deterioration in these assumptions could adversely impact our results. the income approach is also particularly sensitive to the risk-adjusted discount rate selected. for our banking and capital markets reporting units, we performed a quantitative annual assessment in 2022 which concluded that the fair values of these reporting units substantially exceeded their respective carrying amounts. for 2023 and 2024, we performed a qualitative annual assessment of these reporting units and concluded that it remained more likely than not that the fair values of these reporting units continued to exceed their respective carrying amounts. given the substantial excess of fair value over carrying amounts, we believe the likelihood of obtaining materially different results based on a change of assumptions to be low. income taxes there is inherent uncertainty in quantifying our income tax positions. management judgment is required to determine our provision for income taxes and income tax assets and liabilities. management assesses our tax positions based on the application of accounting principles to our facts and circumstances and our interpretation of the tax laws, treaties and regulations, which are complex, vary by jurisdiction and may be subject to different interpretation by relevant taxing authorities. we have various tax filing positions, including the allocation of income among various jurisdictions and the applicability of deductions and credits, which affect the timing and amount of our taxable income. we record a valuation allowance if it is more likely than not that some portion or all of a deferred tax asset will not be realized. we also evaluate and measure uncertain tax 34 positions taken or expected to be taken on tax returns and record liabilities for such positions that in our judgment may not be sustained, or only partially sustained, upon examination by taxing authorities. our assessment may change based on various factors, including changes in facts or circumstances, changes in tax law and audit activity. although we believe that our estimates and judgments are reasonable, actual results may differ from these estimates. if one or more of the taxing authorities were to successfully challenge a position taken, it could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows. related-party transactions we are a party to related-party agreements with worldpay as discussed in note 4 to the consolidated financial statements. in connection with the closing of the worldpay sale, we entered into several agreements with certain worldpay entities and entered into additional agreements with worldpay during 2024, as further described in note 4 to the consolidated financial statements. consolidated results of operations year ended december 31,$ change% change 2024 vs 2023 vs 2024 vs 2023 vs 2024202320222023 202220232022 (in millions) revenue$10,127 $9,831 $9,720 $296 $111 3 %1 % cost of revenue(6,323)(6,175)(6,259)(148)84 2 (1) gross profit3,804 3,656 3,461 148 195 4 6 gross profit margin38 %37 %36 % selling, general and administrative expenses(2,185)(2,096)(2,182)(89)86 4 (4) asset impairments(52)(113)(103)61 (10)nmnm other operating (income) expense, net - related party(142)— — (142)— nmnm operating income1,709 1,447 1,176 262 271 18 23 operating margin17 %15 %12 % nm = not meaningful revenue revenue for the year ended december 31, 2024, increased primarily due to new sales to both new and existing customers and increased transaction processing volumes, partially offset by declines associated with our non-strategic businesses. revenue was not materially impacted by foreign currency movements versus the prior year period. revenue for the year ended december 31, 2023, increased primarily due to recurring revenue growth in the banking and capital markets segments. revenue was not materially impacted by foreign currency movements. see "segment results of operations" below for more detailed explanation. cost of revenue, gross profit and gross profit margin cost of revenue for the year ended december 31, 2024, increased primarily due to increased infrastructure and labor expenses, which include costs to support the worldpay transition services agreement ("tsa"). gross profit margin for the year ended december 31, 2024, increased primarily due to operating leverage, continued cost management and increased higher-margin license revenue, partially offset by dis-synergies associated with the worldpay sale. cost of revenue for the year ended december 31, 2023, decreased due to lower intangible asset amortization resulting primarily from using accelerated amortization methods which apply a declining rate over time, contributing to higher gross profit and gross profit margin. 35 selling, general and administrative expenses selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended december 31, 2024, increased primarily due to higher expenses relating to the separation of the worldpay merchant solutions business, offset in part by lower labor costs. selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended december 31, 2023, decreased primarily due to lower acquisition, integration and other costs partially offset by inflation. asset impairments asset impairments for the year ended december 31, 2024, related primarily to an estimated loss recorded on the expected sale of a non-strategic business. asset impairments for the year ended december 31, 2023, related primarily to the termination of certain internally developed software projects. asset impairments for the year ended december 31, 2022, related primarily to real estate, the sale of a non-strategic business and certain software assets. operating income and operating margin the annual change in operating income and operating margin for the years ended december 31, 2024 and 2023, resulted from the revenue and cost variances noted above. other operating (income) expense, net - related party as described in note 4 to the consolidated financial statements, under the terms of the worldpay tsa, during 2024, the company provided technology infrastructure, risk and security, accounting and various other corporate services to worldpay. the income received for these services is recorded in other operating (income) expense, net - related party, and the corresponding expenses are recognized in cost of revenue and selling, general and administrative expense in the consolidated statement of earnings (loss). total other income (expense), net year ended december 31,$ change% change 2024 vs 2023 vs 2024 vs 2023 vs 2024202320222023202220232022 other income (expense):(in millions) interest expense, net$(250)$(621)$(281)$371 $(340)60 %(121)% other income (expense), net(162)(164)3 2 $(167) nmnm total other income (expense), net$(412)$(785)$(278)373 $(507) nmnm nm = not meaningful the decrease in interest expense, net during the year ended december 31, 2024, was primarily due to a reduction in our outstanding borrowings under our commercial paper programs and senior notes using a portion of the net proceeds from the worldpay sale and increased interest income generated on the proceeds of the worldpay sale. the increase in interest expense, net during the year ended december 31, 2023, was primarily due to higher interest rates on our variable-rate debt, including the impact of our fixed-to-variable interest rate swaps discussed further in note 15 to the consolidated financial statements, offset in part by increased interest income. other income (expense), net for the periods presented consists of various income and expense items outside of the company's operating activities, including foreign currency transaction remeasurement gains and losses; realized and unrealized gains and losses on equity security investments, including impairment losses on these investments; and fair value adjustments on certain non-operating assets and liabilities, including certain derivatives as further described in note 15 to the consolidated financial statements. 36 the year ended december 31, 2024, included loss on extinguishment of debt of approximately $(174) million, as discussed in note 14 to the consolidated financial statements. the $(167) million net change in other income (expense), net during the year ended december 31, 2023, related primarily to foreign currency transaction remeasurement losses and the impact of the change in fair value of interest rate swaps accounted for as economic hedges during the year ended december 31, 2023. see note 15 to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion of the interest rate swaps. provision (benefit) for income taxes year ended december 31,$ change% change 2024 vs 2023 vs 2024 vs 2023 vs 2024202320222023202220232022 (in millions) provision (benefit) for income taxes$362 $157 $314 $205 $(157)nmnm effective tax rate28 %24 %35 % nm = not meaningful the increase in the effective tax rate for the year ended december 31, 2024, was predominately driven by increases to income tax relating to foreign earnings and operations. as described in note 3 to the consolidated financial statements, the company reflects its investor-level tax impact relating to equity method investments as a component of equity method investment earnings (loss), net of tax in the consolidated statement of earnings (loss). therefore, equity method investment earnings (loss) and the related investor-level tax are excluded from the calculation of fis' annual effective tax rate. the decrease in the effective tax rate for the year ended december 31, 2023, was predominately driven by the decrease in gaap pre-tax earnings. equity method investment earnings (loss) year ended december 31,$ change% change 2024 vs 2023 vs 2024 vs 2023 vs 2024202320222023202220232022 (in millions) equity method investment earnings (loss), net of tax$(145)$— $— $(145)$— nmnm nm = not meaningful as discussed in note 1 to the consolidated financial statements, the company completed the worldpay sale on january 31, 2024, retaining a non-controlling equity interest in worldpay. we account for our 45% equity interest in worldpay using the equity method of accounting. during the period from february 1, through december 31, 2024, our share of the net income of worldpay is reported as equity method investment earnings (loss), net of tax, in the consolidated statement of earnings (loss) and reflects fis' investor-level tax impact on its investment in worldpay. see note 4 to the consolidated financial statements for summary worldpay financial information. 37 discontinued operations year ended december 31,$ change% change 2024 vs 2023 vs 2024 vs 2023 vs 2024202320222023202220232022 (in millions) revenue$413 $4,859 $4,809 $(4,446)$50 (92)%1 % earnings (loss) from discontinued operations related to major classes of pre-tax earnings (loss)$179 $(5,549)$(17,276)5,728 11,727 nmnm loss on assets held for sale$— $(1,909)$— 1,909 (1,909)nmnm loss on sale of disposal group$(578)$— $— (578)— nmnm provision (benefit) for income taxes$(1,062)$(301)$52 (761)(353)nmnm earnings (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax attributable to fis$663 $(7,157)$(17,328)7,820 10,171 nmnm nm = not meaningful as discussed in note 1 to the consolidated financial statements, the company completed the worldpay sale on january 31, 2024. the results of the worldpay merchant solutions business prior to the completion of the worldpay sale have been presented as discontinued operations. for the year ended december 31, 2024, changes in each of the captions above from the prior year are a result of the worldpay sale. for the year ended december 31, 2023, revenue from discontinued operations increased from the prior year primarily due to ecommerce volume growth. for the year ended december 31, 2023, earnings (loss) from discontinued operations related to major classes of pre-tax earnings (loss), as well as earnings (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax, included a $6.8 billion impairment of goodwill. additionally, beginning on july 5, 2023, the company ceased amortization of long-lived assets held for sale. for the year ended december 31, 2022, earnings (loss) from discontinued operations related to major classes of pre-tax earnings (loss) included a $17.6 billion impairment of goodwill. for the year ended december 31, 2023, we recorded a pre-tax loss on assets held for sale of $1.9 billion, reflecting the establishment of a valuation allowance to reduce the worldpay merchant solutions disposal group's carrying value down to fair value less cost to sell as discussed in note 3 to the consolidated financial statements. for the year ended december 31, 2024, we recorded a loss on sale of the worldpay disposal group of $578 million, including the impact of post-closing adjustments recorded to date. for the year ended december 31, 2024, the company recorded a tax benefit of $1.1 billion, primarily from the write-off of u.s. deferred tax liabilities that were not transferred in the worldpay sale, net of the estimated u.s. tax cost that the company expects to incur as a result of the worldpay sale. segment results of operations fis reports its financial performance based on the following segments: banking solutions; capital market solutions; and corporate and other. adjusted ebitda is a measure of segment profit or loss reported to the chief operating decision maker, the company's chief executive officer and president, for purposes of making decisions about allocating resources to the segments and assessing their performance. for this reason, adjusted ebitda, as it relates to our segments, is presented in conformity with fasb asc topic 280, segment reporting. adjusted ebitda is defined as net earnings (loss) before net interest expense, net other income (expense), income tax provision (benefit), equity method investment earnings (loss), and depreciation and amortization, and excludes certain costs that do not constitute normal, recurring, cash operating expenses necessary to operate our business. these excluded costs generally consist of the purchase price amortization of acquired intangible assets as well as acquisition, integration and certain other costs and asset impairments. these costs and adjustments are recorded in the 38 corporate and other segment for the periods discussed below. financial information, including details of adjusted ebitda, for each of our segments is set forth in note 22 to the consolidated financial statements. banking solutions years ended december 31,$ change% change 2024 vs 2023 vs 2024 vs 2023 vs 20242023202220232022 2023 2022 (in millions) revenue$6,892 $6,743 $6,625 $149 $118 2 %2 % adjusted ebitda$3,032 $2,908 $2,840 124 68 4 2 adjusted ebitda margin44.0 %43.1 %42.9 % adjusted ebitda margin basis points change90 20 year ended december 31, 2024, compared to 2023: revenue in our banking segment increased 2% for the year ended december 31, 2024. recurring revenue contributed 3% to the total segment revenue growth rate, driven by higher transaction processing revenue. a decline in non-recurring revenue offset the growth rate by (1%), driven by the completion of federally funded pandemic relief programs. adjusted ebitda increased year over year due to the revenue impacts noted above and the positive impact of the operating leverage and labor productivity and outsourcing initiatives. adjusted ebitda margin expanded year over year, driven primarily by labor productivity and outsourcing initiatives and favorable revenue mix compared to the prior year, including an increase in high-margin license revenue. year ended december 31, 2023, compared to 2022: revenue in our banking segment increased 2% for the year ended december 31, 2023. recurring revenue contributed 3% to the total segment revenue growth rate, as payments volumes increased year over year, including volumes in our commercial services and value-added processing businesses. a decline in non-recurring and professional services revenue offset the growth rate by a combined (1%). adjusted ebitda increased year over year due to the revenue impacts noted above and savings generated from the company's future forward initiatives. adjusted ebitda margin was flat year over year, as future forward cost savings offset unfavorable revenue mix year over year, including a reduction in high-margin license and termination fee revenue. capital market solutions years ended december 31,$ change% change 2024s 2023 vs 2024vs 2023 vs 2024202320222023 2022 20232022 (in millions) revenue$2,979 $2,766 $2,631 $213 $135 8 %5 % adjusted ebitda$1,519 $1,390 $1,338 129 52 9 4 adjusted ebitda margin51.0 %50.3 %50.9 % adjusted ebitda margin basis points change70 (60) year ended december 31, 2024, compared to 2023: revenue in our capital markets segment increased 8% for the year ended december 31, 2024. recurring revenue contributed 5% to the total segment revenue growth rate due to new saas sales to both new and existing customers, and non-recurring revenue contributed 2% to the growth rate due primarily to increased license sales. foreign currency movements contributed 1% to the growth rate. 39 adjusted ebitda increased year over year due to the revenue impacts noted above. adjusted ebitda margin increased year over year due primarily to the segment's operating leverage, continued cost management and increased higher-margin license revenue. year ended december 31, 2023, compared to 2022: revenue in our capital markets segment increased 5% for the year ended december 31, 2023. recurring revenue contributed 6% to the total segment revenue growth rate due to new sales and continued movement to a saas-based recurring-revenue model. a decline in professional services revenue offset the growth rate by (1% ). adjusted ebitda increased year over year due to the revenue impacts noted above. adjusted ebitda margin declined year over year due to revenue mix. corporate and other years ended december 31,$ change% change 2024 vs 2023 vs 2024 vs 2023 vs 20242023202220232022 20232022 (in millions) revenue$256 $322 $464 $(66)$(142)(20)%(31)% adjusted ebitda$(415)$(346)$(259)(69)(87)20 34 the corporate and other segment results consist of selling, general and administrative expenses and depreciation and intangible asset amortization not otherwise allocated to the reportable segments. corporate and other also includes other operating income recorded in connection with our tsa with worldpay, as well as operations from certain non-strategic businesses. year ended december 31, 2024, compared to 2023: revenue in our corporate and other segment decreased 20% for the year ended december 31, 2024, due to the ramp down of non-strategic businesses. adjusted ebitda decreased primarily due to the revenue impacts noted above, as well as higher costs due to dis-synergies associated with the worldpay sale. year ended december 31, 2023, compared to 2022: revenue in our corporate and other segment decreased 31% for the year ended december 31, 2023, due to the ramp down of non-strategic businesses, as well as prior year divestitures. adjusted ebitda decreased as a result of the revenue impacts noted above, as well as higher corporate expenses as compared to the prior year period. liquidity and capital resources cash requirements our principal ongoing cash requirements include operating expenses, income taxes, debt service payments, capital expenditures, stockholder dividends, working capital and timing differences in settlement-related assets and liabilities and may include discretionary debt repayments, share repurchases and business acquisitions. our principal sources of funds are cash generated by operations and borrowings, including the capacity under our revolving credit facility, the u.s. commercial paper program and the euro-commercial paper program discussed in note 14 to the consolidated financial statements. the net proceeds from the worldpay sale also provided a significant source of funds during 2024. as of december 31, 2024, the company had $4,547 million of available liquidity, including $834 million of cash and cash equivalents and $3,713 million of capacity available under its revolving credit facility. approximately $370 million of cash and cash equivalents is held by our foreign entities. a portion of our domestic cash and cash equivalents relates to net deposits-in-transit, which are typically settled within a few business days. debt outstanding totaled $11.3 billion, with an effective weighted average interest rate of 2.8%. 40 although we continue to evaluate the optimal capital structure for our business following the completion of the worldpay sale, we intend to maintain investment grade debt ratings for fis. we believe that our current level of cash and cash equivalents plus cash flows from operations will be sufficient to fund our operating cash requirements, capital expenditures and debt service payments for the next 12 months and the foreseeable future. in january 2025, the board of directors approved a quarterly dividend of $0.40 per share beginning with the first quarter of 2025. a regular quarterly dividend of $0.40 per common share is payable on march 25, 2025, to shareholders of record as of the close of business on march 11, 2025. we currently expect to continue to pay quarterly dividends at a target payout ratio consistent with our capital allocation strategy, without regard to our equity method investment earnings (loss) attributable to our interest retained in worldpay post-separation. however, the amount, declaration and payment of future dividends is at the discretion of the board of directors and depends on, among other things, our investment opportunities (including potential mergers and acquisitions), results of operations, financial condition, cash requirements, future prospects, and other factors, including legal and contractual restrictions, that may be considered relevant by our board of directors. additionally, the payment of cash dividends may be limited by covenants in certain debt agreements. in january 2021, our board of directors approved a share repurchase program under which it authorized the company to repurchase up to 100 million shares of our common stock. in august 2024, our board of directors approved a separate, incremental share repurchase program authorizing the repurchase of up to $3.0 billion in aggregate value of shares of our common stock. repurchases under these programs will be made at management's discretion from time to time on the open market or in privately negotiated transactions and through rule 10b5-1 plans. neither of these repurchase programs has an expiration date and either program may be suspended for periods, amended or discontinued at any time. under these share repurchase programs, the company repurchased approximately 54 million shares for an aggregate of $4.0 billion in 2024, 9 million shares for an aggregate of $0.5 billion in 2023 and 21 million shares for an aggregate of $1.8 billion in 2022. approximately 1 million shares remained available for repurchase under the january 2021 program as of december 31, 2024, and the company will exhaust its authorization under this program in the first quarter of 2025, after which it will repurchase shares under the 2024 authorization. we intend to repurchase approximately $1.2 billion of our shares during the year ending december 31, 2025. cash flows from operations our net cash provided by operating activities consists primarily of net earnings, adjusted to add back depreciation and amortization and other non-cash items including asset impairments, loss on extinguishment of debt, and loss from equity method investment. cash flows from operations were $2,175 million, $2,078 million and $1,622 million in 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. cash flows from operations increased $97 million in 2024 and increased $456 million in 2023. the 2024 increase in cash flows from operations is primarily due to higher net earnings adjusted for non-cash items, partially offset by timing of working capital. the 2023 increase in cash flows from operations is primarily due to timing of working capital, partially offset by lower net earnings adjusted for non-cash items. cash flows from investing our principal investing activity relates to capital expenditures for software (purchased and internally developed) and property and equipment. we invested approximately $817 million, $780 million and $996 million in capital expenditures (excluding purchases of certain hardware and software subject to financing or other long-term payment arrangements) during 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. we expect to continue investing in software and in property and equipment to support our business. we also invest in acquisitions that complement and extend our existing solutions and capabilities and provide additional solutions to our portfolio, and we dispose of assets that are no longer considered strategic. in 2024, we used approximately $514 million of cash (net of cash acquired) related to new acquisitions. in 2024, in connection with the worldpay sale, we received $12.8 billion in cash proceeds and divested $3.1 billion in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash included in current assets held for sale at the date of sale. in the fourth quarter of 2023, we paid $202 million related to new acquisitions. we expect to continue to invest in acquisitions as part of our strategy to add solutions to help win new clients and cross-sell to existing clients. during the year ended december 31, 2024, we received distributions of $47 million from worldpay recorded as investing cash flows. we expect to continue to receive regular cash distributions from worldpay pursuant to the terms of the limited liability company operating agreement ("llca") described in note 4 to the consolidated financial statements. 41 cash flows from investing also occasionally include cash received or paid relative to other activities that are not regularly recurring in nature. in 2024 and 2023, we paid approximately $8 million and $20 million, respectively, and in 2022, we received approximately $726 million, of net cash related to the settlement of cross-currency interest rate swaps. cash flows from financing cash flows from financing principally involve borrowing funds, repaying debt, repurchasing shares and paying dividends, for information regarding the company's debt and financing activity, see "risk factors—risks related to our indebtedness" in item 1a and "quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk—interest rate risk" in item 7a of this annual report and notes 14 and 15 to the consolidated financial statements. in 2023, we paid $173 million related to the 2020 virtus acquisition to redeem a put option exercised by the founders as described in note 5 to the consolidated financial statements. contractual obligations fis' long-term contractual obligations generally include its long-term debt, interest on long-term debt including the impact of accounting hedges, net coupon payments on undesignated interest rate swaps, lease payments on certain of its property and equipment and payments for certain purchase commitments and other obligations. see notes 14, 15 and 16 to the consolidated financial statements for information on our long-term debt, financial instruments and operating leases, respectively. the following table summarizes fis' other significant contractual obligations and commitments as of december 31, 2024 (in millions): payments due in less than1-33-5more than total1 yearyearsyears5 years interest (1)$2,504 $266 $467 $394 $1,377 purchase commitments (2) 696 340 286 60 10 interest rate swap net coupons (3)647 108 216 205 118 total$3,847 $714 $969 $659 $1,505 (1)the amounts above include the impact of accounting hedges and assume that (a) applicable margins and commitment fees remain constant; (b) variable-rates in effect as of december 31, 2024, remain constant; (c) no refinancing occurs at debt maturity; (d) only mandatory debt repayments are made; (e) no new hedging transactions are effected; and (f) there are no future currency effects. (2)includes obligations principally for software, maintenance, and consulting and outsourced services, including cloud hosting and data centers. (3)the amounts above reflect the net coupon payments on the fixed-to-variable and offsetting variable-to-fixed interest rate swaps, as described in note 15, that result in a net fixed coupon spread payable by the company; the amounts also assume that there are no future currency effects. recent accounting pronouncements recently adopted accounting guidance see note 2 (v) to the consolidated financial statements for information on recently adopted accounting guidance. recent accounting guidance not yet adopted see note 2 (v) to the consolidated financial statements for information on recent accounting guidance not yet adopted. no recently adopted accounting pronouncements or newly issued accounting pronouncements not yet effective during the fiscal year are expected to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements or disclosures.