management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations (md&a) the consolidated financial statements of general electric company combine the industrial manufacturing and services businesses of ge with the financial services businesses of ge capital and are prepared in conformity with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles (gaap). certain columns and rows within tables may not add due to the use of rounded numbers. percentages presented in this report are calculated from the underlying numbers in millions. discussions throughout this md&a are based on continuing operations unless otherwise noted. the md&a should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and notes to the consolidated financial statements. f or purposes of the financial statement display of sales and costs of sales in our consolidated statement of earnings (loss), “goods” is required by sec regulations to include all sales of tangible products, and "services" must include all other sales, including other services activities. in our md&a section of this report, we refer to sales under product services agreements and sales of both goods (such as spare parts and equipment upgrades) and related services (such as monitoring, maintenance and repairs) as sales of “services,” which is an important part of our operations. we believe investors will gain a better understanding of our company if they understand how we measure and talk about our results. because of the diversity in our businesses, we present our financial statements in a three-column format, which allows investors to see our ge industrial operations separately from our financial services operations. we believe that this provides useful information to investors. when used in this report, unless otherwise indicated by the context, we use these terms to mean the following: consolidated – the adding together of ge and ge capital, giving effect to the elimination of transactions between the two. we present consolidated results in the left-side column of our consolidated statements of earnings (loss), financial position and cash flows. ge – the adding together of all affiliates except ge capital, whose continuing operations are presented on a one-line basis, giving effect to the elimination of transactions among such affiliates. as ge presents the continuing operations of ge capital on a one-line basis, any intercompany profits resulting from transactions between ge and ge capital are eliminated at the ge level. we present the results of ge in the center column of our consolidated statements of earnings (loss), financia... ge capital – the adding together of all affiliates of ge capital giving effect to the elimination of transactions among such affiliates. we present the results of ge capital in the right-side column of our consolidated statements of earnings (loss), financial position and cash flows. ge industrial – ge excluding the continuing operations of ge capital. we believe that this provides investors with a view as to the results of our industrial businesses and corporate items. industrial segment – the sum of our four industrial reportable segments, without giving effect to the elimination of transactions among such segments or between these segments and our financial services segment. this provides investors with a view as to the results of our industrial segments, without inter-segment eliminations and corporate items. this document contains “forward-looking statements” - for details about the uncertainties that could cause our actual results to be materially different than those expressed in our forward-looking statements, see the risk factors and forward-looking statements sections. consolidated results 2019 significant developments. in october 2019, we announced changes to the u.s. ge pension plan and the u.s. ge supplementary plan. as a result of these actions, we recognized a pre-tax increase in non-operating benefit costs of $0.6 billion in the fourth quarter of 2019. see note 13 to the consolidated financial statements for further information. we performed this year’s premium deficiency testing in the aggregate across our run-off insurance portfolio in the third quarter of 2019. as a result of our testing, we identified a premium deficiency resulting in a $1.0 billion pre-tax ($0.8 billion after-tax) charge to earnings. see the other items - insurance section within md&a and note 12 to the consolidated financial statements for further information. in the third quarter of 2019, we completed a tender offer to purchase $4.8 billion of ge senior unsecured debt. the total cash consideration paid for these purchases was $5.0 billion, resulting in a pre-tax loss of $0.3 billion (including fees and other costs associated with the tender). see note 11 to the consolidated financial statements for further information. in september 2019, we sold a total of 144.1 million shares in baker hughes for $3.0 billion in cash (net of certain deal related costs) which reduced our ownership interest from 50.2% to 36.8%. as a result, we have deconsolidated our baker hughes segment and reclassified its results to discontinued operations for all periods presented, and recorded a loss of $8.7 billion ($8.2 billion after-tax) in discontinued operations. see notes 2 and 3 to the consolidated financial statements for further information. in the second and third quarters of 2019, we recognized non-cash pre-tax impairment charges of $0.7 billion and $0.7 billion related to goodwill at our grid solutions equipment and services reporting unit and at our hydro reporting unit, respectively, both within our renewable energy segment. these charges were recorded within earnings from continuing operations at corporate. see note 8 to the consolidated financial statements for further information. ge2019 form 10-k4