table of contents item 7. management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations please read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included under item 15 of this annual report on form 10-k. overview gen is a global company powering digital freedom with a family of trusted brands including norton, avast, lifelock, moneylion and more. our core cyber safety portfolio provides protection across three key categories in multiple channels and geographies, including security and performance management, identity protection, and online privacy. we have built a technology platform that brings together software and service capabilities within these three categories into a comprehensive and easy-to-use integrated platform across our brands. we bring award-winning products and services in cybersecurity, covering security, privacy and identity protection to approximately 500 million users in more than 150 countries so they can live their digital lives safely, privately, and confidently today and for generations to come. we completed the acquisition of moneylion on april 17, 2025. moneylion extends our identity solutions into offering comprehensive financial wellness through moneylion’s full-featured personal finance platform that includes credit building and financial management services. for more information on the moneylion acquisition, please see note 19 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this annual report on form 10-k. fiscal calendar we have a 52/53-week fiscal year ending on the friday closest to march 31. fiscal 2025, 2024 and 2023 in this report refers to fiscal years ended march 28, 2025, march 29, 2024 and march 31, 2023, respectively, each of which was a 52-week year. financial summary the following table provides our key financial metrics for fiscal 2025 compared with fiscal 2024: fiscal year (in millions, except for per share amounts)20252024 net revenues$3,935 $3,800 operating income (loss)$1,610 $1,110 net income (loss)$643 $607 net income (loss) per share - diluted$1.03 $0.95 net cash provided by (used in) operating activities$1,221 $2,064 as of (in millions)march 28, 2025march 29, 2024 cash and cash equivalents $1,006 $846 •net revenues increased $135 million, primarily due to higher sales in both our consumer security and identity and information protection products. •operating income (loss) increased $500 million, primarily due to increased net revenues, decreased legal costs related to ongoing litigation, lower amortization of intangible assets and restructuring costs related to our acquisition of avast. •net income (loss) increased $36 million and net income per share increased $0.08, primarily due to increased operating income discussed above and decreased interest expense associated with our term a and term b facilities. this is offset by the absence of an income tax benefit in the second quarter of fiscal 2024. •cash and cash equivalents increased by $160 million compared to march 29, 2024, primarily due to cash generated from operating activities during fiscal 2025 and proceeds from the issuance of 6.25% senior notes. this is partially offset by repurchases of our common stock, cash interest paid, dividends paid to shareholders, repayment of 5.00% senior notes, voluntary prepayments of our term b facility, and mandatory principal amortization payments of our term a and b facility. •during fiscal 2025, we returned $955 million of capital back to shareholders and bondholders. this was achieved through the repurchase of 11 million shares of our common stock, totaling $272 million. additionally, we paid out a total of $313 million in quarterly dividends and carried out $370 million in net debt pay downs, including $30 million in voluntary prepayments applied exclusively to the term b facility. •during fiscal 2025, we increased net direct customers by 1.3 million, increased monthly direct arpu by $0.04 and increased our direct retention rate by 1%. global macroeconomic conditions as a global company, our results of operations and cash flows may be influenced by global macroeconomic conditions, including, but not limited to, increased tariffs, foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations, the impact of interest rate fluctuations, elevated inflation, ongoing and new geopolitical conflicts, including the unknown impacts of current and future trade regulations, instability in the global banking sector, economic slowdown and recession risks, any of which may persist for an extended period. despite this, we are confident in the long-term overall health of our business, the strength of our product offerings and our ability to continue to execute on our strategy, including bringing award-winning products and services in cybersecurity and offering comprehensive financial wellness to our customers. we continue to monitor the direct and indirect impacts of these global macroeconomic or other geopolitical factors. if the economic uncertainty continues, we may experience additional negative impacts on customer renewals, customer collections, sales and marketing efforts, customer deployments, product development, or other financial metrics. additional broader implications of these events on our business, results of operations, and overall financial position still remain uncertain and could result in further adverse impacts to our reported results. for further discussion of the potential impacts of global macroeconomic conditions and geopolitical factors on our business, please see “risk factors” in part i, item 1a and part ii, item 7a below. critical accounting estimates the preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related notes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the u.s. (u.s. gaap) requires us to make estimates, including judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. we have based our estimates, judgements and assumptions on historical experience and on various other factors we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. we evaluate our estimates, judgements and assumptions on a regular basis and make changes accordingly. management believes that the accounting estimates employed and the resulting amounts are reasonable; however, actual results may differ from these estimates. making estimates, judgments and assumptions about future events is inherently unpredictable and is subject to significant uncertainties, some of which are beyond our control. should any of these estimates, judgements or assumptions change or prove to have been incorrect, it could have a material impact on our results of operations, financial position and cash flows. management believes the following significant accounting policies reflect the critical estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. a summary of our significant accounting policies is included in note 1, and a description of recently adopted accounting pronouncements and our expectation of the impact on our consolidated financial statements and disclosures are included in note 2 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this annual report on form 10-k. business combinations we allocate the purchase price of acquired businesses to the tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values on the acquisition date. any residual purchase price is recorded as goodwill. the allocation of purchase price requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions in determining the fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed especially with respect to intangible assets. critical estimates in valuing intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows from customer relationships, developed technology, trade names and other intangibles, and discount rates. management estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. third-party valuation specialists are utilized for certain estimates. unanticipated events and circumstances may occur which may affect the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates or actual results. income taxes we are subject to tax in multiple u.s. and foreign tax jurisdictions. we are required to estimate the current tax exposure as well as assess the temporary differences between the accounting and tax treatment of assets and liabilities, including items such as accruals and allowances not currently deductible for tax purposes. we apply judgment in the recognition and measurement of current and deferred income taxes which includes the following critical accounting estimates. we use a two-step process to recognize liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits. the first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. there is judgement and complexity involved in assessing if the tax position is more likely than not. if we determine that the tax position will more likely than not be sustained on audit, the second step requires us to estimate and measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement. it is inherently difficult and subjective to estimate such amounts, as this requires us to determine the probability of various outcomes. we re-evaluate these unrecognized tax benefits on a quarterly basis. this evaluation is based on factors including, but not limited to, changes in facts or circumstances, changes in tax law, effectively settled issues under audit and new audit activity. such a change in recognition or measurement would result in the recognition of a tax benefit or an additional charge to the tax provision in the period. loss contingencies we are subject to contingencies that expose us to losses, including, but not limited to, regulatory proceedings, claims, mediations, arbitration and litigation, arising out of the ordinary course of business. an estimated loss from such contingencies is recognized as a charge to income if it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. judgment is required in both the determination of probability and the determination as to whether a loss is reasonably estimable. we review the status of each significant matter quarterly, and we may revise our estimates. until the final resolution of such matters, there may be an exposure to loss in excess of the amount recorded, and such amounts could be material. should any of our estimates and assumptions change or prove to have been incorrect, it could have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements for that reporting period. 35 recently adopted authoritative guidance for a discussion of recently adopted authoritative guidance and their potential effects refer to note 2 of our notes to the consolidated financial statements of this annual report on form 10-k. recently issued authoritative guidance not yet adopted asu 2023-09, income taxes (topic 740): improvements to income tax disclosures. in december 2023, the fasb issued new guidance to update income tax disclosure requirements, requiring disaggregated information about an entity’s effective tax rate reconciliation as well as income taxes paid. this is effective for fiscal years beginning after december 15, 2024. we are currently evaluating the impact of the adoption of this guidance on our consolidated financial statements and disclosures. asu 2024-03 and asu 2025-01, income statement - reporting comprehensive income (subtopic 220-40): expense disaggregation disclosures. in november 2024, the fasb issued new guidance requiring that public business entities disclose additional information about specific expense categories in the notes to financial statements at interim and annual reporting periods. this is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after december 15, 2026, and interim reporting periods beginning after december 15, 2027. we are currently evaluating the impact of the adoption of this guidance on our condensed consolidated financial statements and disclosures. results of operations we have elected to omit discussion on the earliest of the three years presented in the consolidated financial statements of this annual report on form 10-k. refer to part ii, item 7. management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations of our annual report on form 10-k for the fiscal year ended march 29, 2024 for year-over-year comparisons of the results of operation between fiscal 2024 and fiscal 2023 as well as discussion of fiscal 2023 performance metrics and cash flow activity, all of which are incorporated herein by reference. the following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data as a percentage of net revenues for the periods indicated: fiscal year 20252024 net revenues100 %100 % cost of revenues20 19 gross profit80 81 operating expenses: sales and marketing19 19 research and development8 9 general and administrative7 16 amortization of intangible assets4 6 restructuring and other costs0 2 impairment of intangible assets 0 — total operating expenses39 52 operating income (loss)41 29 interest expense(15)(18) other income (expense), net0 — income (loss) before income taxes26 12 income tax expense (benefit)10 (4) net income (loss)16 %16 % note: the percentages may not add due to rounding. net revenues fiscal year% change (in millions, except for percentages)202520242025 vs. 2024 net revenues$3,935 $3,800 4 % fiscal 2025 compared to fiscal 2024 net revenues increased $135 million, due to a $95 million increase in sales of our identity and information protection products and a $53 million increase in sales of our consumer security products. this was partially offset by a $13 million decrease in our legacy product offerings. this is inclusive of $11 million of foreign exchange headwinds, in our consumer security solutions. performance metrics we regularly monitor a number of metrics in order to measure our current performance and estimate our future performance. we believe these key operating metrics are useful to investors because management uses these metrics to assess the growth of 36 our business and the effectiveness of our marketing and operational strategies. our metrics may be calculated in a manner different than similar metrics used by other companies. the following table summarizes supplemental key performance metrics for our solutions: fiscal year (in millions, except for per user amounts and percentages)20252024 direct customer revenue $3,456 $3,341 partner revenues$429 $396 total cyber safety revenues $3,885 $3,737 legacy revenues (1) $50 $63 direct customer count (at quarter-end)40.4 39.1 direct average revenue per user (arpu) $7.26 $7.22 retention rate 78 %77 % (1) legacy revenues includes revenues from products or solutions from markets that we have exited and in which we no longer operate, have been discontinued or identified to be discontinued, or remain in maintenance mode as a result of integration and product portfolio decisions. we define direct customer count as active paid users of our products and solutions who have a direct billing and/or registration relationship with us at the end of the reported period. we exclude users on free trials from our direct customer count. users who have indirectly purchased and/or registered for our products or solutions through partners are excluded unless such users convert or renew their subscription directly with us or sign up for a paid membership through our web stores or third-party app stores. arpu is calculated as estimated direct customer revenues for the period divided by the average direct customer count for the same period, expressed as a monthly figure. non-gaap estimated direct customer revenues and arpu have limitations as analytical tools and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for u.s. gaap estimated direct customer revenues or other u.s. gaap measures. we monitor arpu because it helps us understand the rate at which we are monetizing our consumer customer base. retention rate is defined as the percentage of direct customers as of the end of the period from one year ago who are still active as of the most recently completed fiscal period. we monitor the retention rate to evaluate the effectiveness of our strategies to improve renewals of subscriptions. the methodologies used to measure these metrics require judgment and are subject to change due to improvements or revisions to our methodology. from time to time, we review our metrics and may discover inaccuracies or make adjustments to improve their accuracy, which can result in adjustments to our historical metrics. our ability to recalculate our historical metrics may be impacted by data limitations or other factors that require us to apply different methodologies for such adjustments. we generally do not intend to update previously disclosed metrics for any such inaccuracies or adjustments that are deemed not material. net revenues by geographical region percentage of revenue by geographical region as presented below is based on the billing location of the customers. fiscal year (1) 20252024 americas66 %65 % emea24 %24 % apj10 %11 % (1) from time to time, changes in allocation methodologies cause changes to the revenue by geographic area above. when changes occur, we recast historical amounts to match the current methodology, such as for fiscal 2024 where we aligned allocation methodologies across similar product categories. the americas include u.s., canada, and latin america; emea includes europe, middle east, and africa; apj includes asia pacific and japan. percentage of revenue by geographic region remained consistent in fiscal 2025 and fiscal 2024. cost of revenues fiscal year% change (in millions, except for percentages)202520242025 vs. 2024 cost of revenues$776 $731 6 % 37 fiscal 2025 compared to fiscal 2024 our cost of revenues increased $45 million, primarily due to a $42 million increase in marketing affiliate expenses. operating expenses fiscal year% change (in millions, except for percentages)202520242025 vs. 2024 sales and marketing$745 $733 2 % research and development329 332 (1)% general and administrative291 604 (52)% amortization of intangible assets174 233 (25)% restructuring and other costs7 57 (88)% impairment of intangible assets 3 — — % total$1,549 $1,959 (21)% our operating expenses decreased in fiscal 2025 compared to fiscal 2024 primarily due to a decrease in legal accruals, amortization of intangible assets and restructuring costs related to our acquisition of avast. fiscal 2025 compared to fiscal 2024 sales and marketing, research and development and impairment of intangible assets expenses remained relatively flat. general and administrative expense decreased $313 million, primarily due to the absence of $369 million in legal costs related to our litigation with columbia and gsa in fiscal 2024. this was partially offset by a $66 million legal contract dispute cost with e-commerce partner b during fiscal 2025. refer to note 1 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this annual report on form 10-k for additional information on the legal contract dispute with e-commerce partner b. amortization of intangible assets decreased $59 million, primarily due to certain intangible assets being fully amortized during fiscal 2024. restructuring and other costs decreased $50 million, primarily due a $48 million decrease in severance, termination benefits, contract cancellation costs and other exit and disposal costs in connection with the september 2022 plan. see note 12 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements for details of the fiscal 2025 restructuring activities. non-operating income (expense), net fiscal year $ change (in millions)202520242025 vs. 2024 interest expense$(578)$(669)$91 interest income28 25 3 foreign exchange gain (loss)2 3 (1) gain (loss) on equity investments (30)(40)10 gain (loss) on sale of properties — 9 (9) other(3)9 (12) non-operating income (expense), net$(581)$(663)$82 fiscal 2025 compared to fiscal 2024 non-operating income (expense), net, decreased $82 million, primarily due to a $90 million decrease in interest expense resulting from the voluntary prepayments and repricing of our term a and term b facilities. provision for income taxes fiscal year (in millions, except for percentages)20252024 income (loss) before income taxes $1,029 $447 income tax expense (benefit) $386 $(160) effective tax rate 38 %(36)% fiscal 2025 compared to fiscal 2024 our effective tax rate increased primarily due to the absence of an income tax benefit in the second quarter of fiscal 2024, in addition to changes in unrecognized tax benefits and related interest and penalties, and the u.s. taxation on foreign earnings in fiscal 2025. see note 13 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this annual report on form 10-k for information about our unrecognized tax benefits. the organization for economic cooperation and development (oecd) and many countries have proposed to reallocate a portion of profits of large multinational enterprises (mne) with an annual global turnover exceeding €20 billion to markets where 38 sales arise (pillar one), as well as enact a global minimum tax rate of at least 15% for mne with an annual global turnover exceeding €750 million (pillar two). on december 12, 2022, the european union reached an agreement to implement the pillar two directive of the oecd’s reform of international taxation at the european union level. the agreement affirms that all member states must transpose the pillar two directive by december 31, 2023. the rules will therefore first be applicable for fiscal years starting on or after december 31, 2023. ireland, czech republic, and certain jurisdictions in which we operate have enacted legislation to implement pillar two and other countries are actively considering changes to their tax laws to adopt certain parts of the oecd’s proposals. the enactment of pillar two legislation is not expected to have a material adverse effect on our effective tax rate and consolidated financial statements in the near term. we will continue to monitor and reflect the impact of such legislative changes in future consolidated financial statements as appropriate. liquidity, capital resources and cash requirements liquidity and capital resources we have historically relied on cash generated from operations, borrowings under credit facilities, issuances of debt and proceeds from divestitures for our liquidity needs. our capital allocation strategy is to balance driving stockholder returns, managing financial risk and preserving our flexibility to pursue strategic options, including acquisitions and mergers. historically, this has included a quarterly cash dividend, the repayment of debt and the repurchase of shares of our common stock. based on past performance and current expectations, we believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, together with cash generated from operations, amounts available under our revolving facility and our future refinancing plans related to our upcoming maturities, will be sufficient to meet our working capital needs, support on-going business activities and finance the expected synergy costs related to the acquisition of avast and moneylion through at least the next 12 months and to meet our known long-term contractual obligations. we are currently not aware of any trends or demands, commitments, events or uncertainties that will result in or that are reasonably likely to result in our liquidity increasing or decreasing in any material way that will impact our capital needs during or beyond the next 12 months. however, our future liquidity and capital requirements may vary materially from those as of march 28, 2025 depending on several factors, including, but not limited to, economic conditions; political climate; the expansion of sales and marketing activities; the costs to acquire or invest in businesses; outcome of income tax audits with relevant tax authorities; resolution of legal proceedings, including, but not limited to, regulatory proceedings, claims, mediations, arbitrations and litigation; and the risks and uncertainties discussed in “risk factors” in part i, item 1a. cash flows the following table summarizes our cash flow activities in fiscal 2025 and 2024: fiscal year (in millions)20252024 net cash provided by (used in): operating activities$1,221 $2,064 investing activities$(100)$2 financing activities$(970)$(1,961) increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents$160 $96 see note 7 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this annual report on form 10-k for our supplemental cash flow information. cash from operating activities our cash flows provided by and used in operating activities in fiscal 2025 decreased $843 million, primarily due to the absence of an income tax refund related to the filing of our fiscal 2023 tax return received during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2024. cash from investing activities our cash flows provided by and used in investing activities in fiscal 2025 decreased $102 million, primarily related to the cash consideration paid for the acquisition of a technology-enabled personal finance education and recommendation platform during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2025. cash from financing activities our cash flows used in financing activities in fiscal 2025 decreased $991 million, primarily due to the issuance of our 6.25% senior notes, lower voluntary prepayments of our term b facility and repurchases of common stock under our repurchase program. this was offset by the repayment of our 5.0% senior notes, using the net proceeds from the 6.25% senior notes. cash and cash equivalents as of march 28, 2025, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $1,006 million, of which $359 million was held by our foreign subsidiaries. our cash and cash equivalents are managed with the objective to preserve principal, maintain liquidity and generate investment returns. the participation exemption system under current u.s. federal tax regulations generally allows us to make distributions of non-u.s. earnings to the u.s. without incurring additional u.s. federal tax; however, these distributions may be subject to applicable state or non-u.s. taxes. 39 debt we have an undrawn revolving credit facility of $1,494 million, net of our letters of credit, which expires in september 2027. stock repurchases during the fiscal 2025 and 2024, we executed repurchases of 11 million and 21 million of our common stock under our existing stock repurchase program for an aggregate amount of $272 million and $441 million, respectively. material cash requirements our principal cash requirements are primarily to meet our working capital needs, support on-going business activities, including payment of taxes and cash dividends, payment of contractual obligations, funding capital expenditures, servicing existing debt, repurchasing shares of our common stock and investing in business acquisitions and mergers. debt instruments as of march 28, 2025, our total outstanding principal amount of indebtedness is summarized as follows. see note 10 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this annual report on form 10-k for further information on our debt. (in millions)march 28, 2025 term loans$5,905 senior notes2,450 total debt$8,355 the amended credit agreement contains customary representations and warranties and affirmative and negative covenants, including compliance with specified financial ratios. as of march 28, 2025, we were in compliance with all debt covenants. see note 10 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this annual report on form 10-k for further information regarding financial ratios and debt covenant compliance. dividends on may 6, 2025, we announced a cash dividend of $0.125 per share of common stock to be paid in june 2025. any future dividends and dividend equivalents will be subject to the approval from our board of directors. stock repurchase program under our stock repurchase program, we may purchase shares of our outstanding common stock on the open market (including through trading plans intended to qualify under rule 10b5-1 under the exchange act) and through accelerated stock repurchase transactions. in may 2024, our board of directors authorized a new stock repurchase program through which we may repurchase shares of our common stock in an aggregate amount of up to $3 billion with no fixed expiration. this new stock repurchase program will supersede any amounts under the prior stock repurchase programs. as of march 28, 2025, the remaining balance of our stock repurchase authorization is $2,728 million and does not have an expiration date. the timing and actual number of shares repurchased will depend on a variety of factors, including price, general business and market conditions and other investment opportunities. restructuring in connection with the acquisition of avast, our board of directors approved a restructuring plan (the september 2022 plan) to realize cost savings and operational synergies, which became effective upon the close of the acquisition on september 12, 2022. we have incurred and expect to incur cash expenditures for severance and termination benefits, contract terminations, facilities closures, and the sale of underutilized facilities as well as stock-based compensation charges for accelerated equity awards for certain terminated employees. we expect that we will incur total costs up to $150 million following the completion of the acquisition. these actions are expected to be completed by the end of calendar year 2025. during fiscal 2025, we made $25 million in cash payments related to the september 2022 plan. see note 12 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this annual report on form 10-k for further cash flow information associated with our restructuring activities. 40 significant contractual obligations the following is a schedule of our principal commitments as of march 28, 2025. the expected timing and amount of short-term and long-term payments of the obligations in the following table is estimated based on current information. timing of payments and actual amounts paid may be different, depending on the time of receipt of goods or services, or changes to agreed-upon amounts for certain obligations. (in millions)short-term paymentslong-term paymentstotal contractual obligations: debt (principal payments) (1) $291 $8,064 $8,355 interest payments on debt (2) 605 1,465 2,070 purchase obligations (3) 316 118 434 deemed repatriation taxes (4) 139 — 139 operating leases (5) 16 48 64 total $1,367 $9,695 $11,062 (1)as of march 28, 2025, our total outstanding principal amount of indebtedness is comprised of $5,905 million in term loans and $2,450 million in senior notes. see note 10 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this annual report on form 10-k for further information about our debt and debt covenants. (2)interest payments calculated based on the contractual terms of the related debt instruments. interest on variable rate debt was calculated using the interest rate in effect as of march 28, 2025. interest on variable rate debt may vary based on the performance of our interest rate swaps. see note 10 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this annual report on form 10-k for further information on the term loans and senior notes. (3)agreements for purchases of goods or services, with terms that are enforceable and legally binding and specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum, or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transaction. these amounts include agreements to purchase goods or services that have cancellation provisions requiring little or no payment. the amounts under such contracts are included because management believes that cancellation of these contracts is unlikely, and we expect to make future cash payments according to the contract terms or in similar amounts for similar materials. (4)transition tax payments on previously untaxed foreign earnings of foreign subsidiaries under the tax cuts and jobs act, which may be paid through july 2025. (5)payments for various non-cancelable operating lease agreements that expire on various dates through fiscal 2033. the amounts in the table above exclude expected sublease income. see note 9 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this annual report on form 10-k for further information on leases. due to the uncertainty with respect to the timing of future cash flows associated with our unrecognized tax benefits and other long-term taxes as of march 28, 2025, we are unable to make reasonably reliable estimates of the period of cash settlement with the respective taxing authorities. therefore, $1,419 million in long-term income taxes payable has been excluded from the contractual obligations table. see note 13 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this annual report on form 10-k for further information. indemnifications in the ordinary course of business, we may provide indemnifications of varying scope and terms to customers, vendors, lessors, business partners, subsidiaries, and other parties with respect to certain matters, including, but not limited to, product warranties and losses arising out of our breach of agreements or representations and warranties made by us, including claims alleging that our software infringes on the intellectual property rights of a third party. in addition, our bylaws contain indemnification obligations to our directors, officers, employees and agents, and we have entered into indemnification agreements with our directors and certain of our officers to give such directors and officers additional contractual assurances regarding the scope of the indemnification set forth in our bylaws and to provide additional procedural protections. we maintain director and officer insurance, which may cover certain liabilities arising from our obligation to indemnify our directors and officers. refer to note 18 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this annual report on form 10-k for further information on our indemnifications.