table of contents item 7 | executive overview item 7. management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations. management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations (md&a) should be read in conjunction with the consolidated and combined financial statements included in “item 8. financial statements and supplementary data” contained herein. executive overview market conditions since early 2021, world-wide oil and natural gas supply and demand imbalances and related volatility of oil and natural gas prices (including as a result of the covid-19 pandemic) have resulted in dramatic fluctuations in oil and natural gas markets. the volatility continued in 2024 as markets were impacted by macroeconomic uncertainty, non-opec supply growth, lack of demand recovery in china, geopolitical unrest in the middle east and the russia-ukraine conflict. in the u.s., oil and natural gas production in 2024 remained elevated, despite a generally declining rig count, as a result of the industry's focus on efficiencies and higher service intensity. lower commodity pricing and u.s. land rig counts generally contributed to softness in the market for energy products and services in north america. the international rig count was relatively flat in 2024, as gains in africa and the middle east were offset by reductions in latin america. globally, we continue to be impacted by extended supply chain lead times for the supply of select raw materials. we monitor market trends and work to mitigate cost impacts through economies of scale in global procurement, technology modifications, and efficient sourcing practices. also, while we have been impacted by inflationary cost increases, primarily related to chemicals, cement, and logistics costs, we generally try to pass much of those increases on to our customers and we believe we have effective solutions to minimize their operational impact. financial results the following graph illustrates our revenue and operating margins for each operating segment over the past three years. during 2024, we generated total company revenue of $22.9 billion, flat when compared to the $23.0 billion of revenue generated in 2023, with our completion and production (c&p) segment revenue decreasing by 3% and our drilling and evaluation (d&e) segment revenue increasing by 4%. total company operating income was $3.8 billion in 2024, compared to $4.1 billion in 2023. driven in large part by a decrease in the average north america rig count in 2024 as compared to 2023, our north america revenue decreased 8% in 2024, resulting from lower pressure pumping services in u.s. land, reduced wireline activity, and decreased fluid services in the region. these declines were partially offset by higher drilling activity in the region and improved artificial lift activity in u.s. land. internationally, revenue improved 6% in 2024 compared to 2023, led by middle east/asia, despite the international average rig count for 2024 being flat compared to 2023. our operating performance and liquidity are described in more detail in “liquidity and capital resources” and “business environment and results of operations.” hal 2024 form 10-k | 23 table of contents item 7 | executive overview sustainability and energy mix transition in 2021, we announced our target to achieve a 40% reduction in our scope 1 and 2 emissions by 2035 from the 2018 baseline. during 2024, we continued to execute on our priorities to drive down our emissions intensity. at the same time, we support our customers in their emissions reduction efforts by continuously developing and deploying goods and services that are accretive to their goals as well as ours. as the energy mix transition unfolds, we seek to apply our expertise and resources in growth sectors adjacent to our traditional oilfield services space, including carbon capture, utilization, and storage, and geothermal. finally, we will continue to focus on accelerating the success of clean tech start-ups via halliburton labs, which also allows us to participate in the energy mix transition at relatively low risk by investing our expertise, resources, and team without a significant outlay of capital while we learn where we can strategically engage new markets. as of december 31, 2024, halliburton labs had 38 participants and alumni organizations. additionally, we published our 2023 annual and sustainability report (asr) in april of 2024, which detailed our strategy and progress on sustainability issues, as well as our efforts on increased environmental reporting transparency, including conducting a climate-risk scenario analysis, and expect to publish our 2024 asr in april of 2025. information on our website, including the asr, is not incorporated by reference into this annual report on form 10-k. hal 2024 form 10-k | 24 item 7 | liquidity and capital resources liquidity and capital resources we had $2.6 billion and $2.3 billion of cash and equivalents as of december 31, 2024 and december 31, 2023, respectively. significant sources and uses of cash in 2024 sources of cash: •cash flows from operating activities were $3.9 billion. working capital, which consists of receivables, inventories, and accounts payable, collectively had a negative impact of $103 million, primarily due to increased receivables. uses of cash: •capital expenditures were $1.4 billion. •we repurchased 30.5 million shares of our common stock for $1.0 billion. •we paid $600 million of dividends to our shareholders. •we repurchased $100 million aggregate principal amounts of various series of our outstanding debt. future sources and uses of cash we manufacture most of our own equipment, which provides us with some flexibility to increase or decrease our capital expenditures based on market conditions. we currently expect capital spending for 2025 to be approximately 6% of revenue. we believe this level of spend will allow us to invest in our key strategic technologies and businesses, including the construction and deployment of our zeus electric fracturing systems in north america and the international growth of our artificial lift, well intervention, unconventionals, and drilling technologies. we will continue to maintain capital discipline and monitor the rapidly changing market dynamics, and we may adjust our capital spend accordingly. in 2025, we expect to pay approximately $645 million for contractual purchase obligations (with another $143 million due through 2027), $392 million of interest on debt, and $395 million under our leasing arrangements. payments for interest on our debt are expected to remain relatively flat for the foreseeable future. see notes to consolidated financial statements, note 6 and note 10 for additional information on expected future payments under our leasing arrangements and debt maturities. we are not able to reasonably estimate the timing of cash outflows associated with our uncertain tax positions, in part because we are unable to predict the timing of potential tax settlements with applicable taxing authorities. as of december 31, 2024, we had $196 million of gross unrecognized tax benefits, excluding penalties and interest, of which we estimate $176 million may require us to make a cash payment. we estimate that approximately $112 million of the cash payment will not be settled within the next 12 months. while we maintain focus on liquidity and debt reduction, we are also focused on providing cash returns to our shareholders. in 2023, our board approved a capital return framework with a goal of returning at least 50% of our annual free cash flow to shareholders through dividends and share repurchases. we returned $1.6 billion of capital to shareholders in 2024 through buybacks and dividends. during 2024, our quarterly dividend rate was $0.17 per common share, or approximately $150 million in the aggregate. we may utilize share repurchases as part of our capital return framework. our board of directors has authorized a program to repurchase our common stock from time to time. we repurchased 30.5 million shares of common stock during the year ended december 31, 2024. approximately $3.0 billion remained authorized for repurchases under our program as of december 31, 2024 and may be used for open market and other share purchases. during 2023, we began our migration to sap s4 which we now expect to complete in the first half of 2026. we now estimate the total project investment to increase between $20 million and $30 million above our initial $250 million forecast, of which we have incurred $124 million through december 31, 2024. for 2025, we expect to spend approximately $100 million on this project. we believe the new system will provide important efficiency benefits, cost savings, enhanced visibility to our operations, and advanced analytics that will benefit us and our customers. we do not intend to incur additional debt in 2025, as we believe our cash on hand and earnings from operations are sufficient to cover our obligations for the year. hal 2024 form 10-k | 25 item 7 | liquidity and capital resources other factors affecting liquidity financial position in current market. as of december 31, 2024, we had $2.6 billion of cash and equivalents and $3.5 billion of available committed bank credit under a revolving credit facility with an expiration date of april 27, 2027. we believe we have a manageable debt maturity profile, with approximately $471 million coming due beginning in 2025 through 2027, with the majority coming due in 2025. furthermore, we have no financial covenants or material adverse change provisions in our bank agreements, and our debt maturities extend over a long period of time. we believe our cash on hand, cash flows generated from operations, and our available credit facility provide sufficient liquidity to address the challenges and opportunities of the current market and our expected global cash needs for 2025, including capital expenditures, working capital investments, shareholder returns, if any, and debt repurchases, if any, and scheduled interest and principal payments. guarantee agreements. in the normal course of business, we have agreements with financial institutions under which approximately $2.8 billion letters of credit, bank guarantees, or surety bonds were outstanding as of december 31, 2024. some of the outstanding letters of credit have triggering events that would entitle a bank to require cash collateralization, however, none of these triggering events have occurred. as of december 31, 2024, we had no material off-balance sheet liabilities and were not required to make any material cash distributions to our unconsolidated subsidiaries. we have entered into credit default swaps (cdss) with third-party financial institutions that had an aggregate notional amount outstanding as of december 31, 2024 of $739 million related to borrowings provided by the financial institutions to one of our primary customers in mexico, of which a portion of the proceeds were then utilized by this customer to pay certain of our outstanding receivables. approximately $186 million of the outstanding amount of the cdss reduces on a monthly basis over its remaining 14-month term and $203 million reduces on a monthly basis over its remaining 18-month term. the remaining $350 million outstanding amount is expected to increase to as much as $805 million in the first quarter of 2025 and will reduce over its remaining 19-month term beginning february 2025. credit ratings. our credit ratings with standard & poor’s (s&p) remained bbb+ for our long-term debt and a-2 for our short-term debt, with a positive outlook. our credit ratings with moody's investors service remain a3 for our long-term debt and p-2 for our short-term debt, with a stable outlook. customer receivables. in line with industry practice, we bill our customers for our services in arrears and are, therefore, subject to our customers delaying or failing to pay our invoices. in weak economic environments, we may experience increased delays and failures to pay our invoices due to, among other reasons, a reduction in our customers’ cash flow from operations and their access to the credit markets, as well as unsettled political conditions. receivables from our primary customer in mexico accounted for approximately 8% of our total receivables as of december 31, 2024. while we have experienced payment delays from our primary customer in mexico, these amounts are not in dispute and we have not historically had, and we do not expect to have, any material write-offs due to collectability of receivables from this customer. hal 2024 form 10-k | 26 item 7 | business environment and results of operations business environment and results of operations we operate in more than 70 countries throughout the world to provide a comprehensive range of services and products to the energy industry. our revenue is generated from the sale of services and products to major, national, and independent oil and natural gas companies worldwide. the industry we serve is highly competitive with many substantial competitors in each segment of our business. in 2024, 2023, and 2022, based on the location of services provided and products sold, 40%, 44%, and 45%, respectively, of our consolidated revenue was from the united states. no other country accounted for more than 10% of our revenue. activity within our business segments is significantly impacted by spending on upstream exploration, development, and production programs by our customers. also impacting our activity is the status of the global economy, which impacts oil and natural gas consumption. some of the more significant determinants of current and future spending levels of our customers are oil and natural gas prices, our customers’ expectations about future prices, global oil supply and demand, the impact on natural gas supply and demand in north america of electrification and data centers power requirements, completions intensity, the world economy, the availability of capital, government regulation, and global stability, which together drive worldwide drilling and completions activity. we expect that many of our customers in north america will continue their strategy of operating within their cash flows and generating returns rather than prioritizing production growth. lower oil and natural gas prices usually translate into lower exploration and production budgets and lower rig count, while the opposite is usually true for higher oil and natural gas prices. our financial performance is therefore significantly affected by oil and natural gas prices and worldwide rig activity, which are summarized in the tables below. the table below shows the average prices for west texas intermediate (wti) crude oil, united kingdom brent crude oil, and henry hub natural gas. 202420232022 oil price - wti (1) $76.55 $77.64 $96.04 oil price - brent (1) 80.53 82.47 100.78 natural gas price - henry hub (2) 2.19 2.54 6.29 (1) oil price measured in dollars per barrel. (2) natural gas price measured in dollars per million british thermal units (btu), or mmbtu. the historical average rig counts based on the weekly baker hughes rig count data were as follows: 202420232022 u.s. land580 669 708 u.s. offshore 19 18 15 canada187 177 175 north america786 864 898 international 948 948 851 worldwide total1,734 1,812 1,749 hal 2024 form 10-k | 27 item 7 | business environment and results of operations business outlook looking ahead to 2025 and beyond, we anticipate a rise in global oil and natural gas demand. the international energy agency anticipates both oil and natural gas demand to continue growing through 2030 underscoring the continued importance of both resources in the global energy mix. in addition, we believe oil supply dynamics have fundamentally changed due to investor return requirements, regulatory initiatives adverse to oil and gas exploration and production, and initiatives that favor alternative energy. we believe that despite these changes, increased investment in existing and new sources of oil and natural gas production is needed to address the increased demand. this will necessitate production from conventional and unconventional, deep-water and shallow-water, and short and long-cycle projects. we expect that increased oil and natural gas production requirements will in turn create demand for our products and services. furthermore, easing inflationary pressures in organization for economic co-operation (oecd) countries may lead to central bank rate cuts that could sustain economic growth. additionally, we expect a growing global economy combined with rising living standards in developing nations will increase energy consumption. we expect natural gas demand should increase over time by the burgeoning number of data centers, the rise of artificial intelligence, and the electrification of transportation and other sectors of the economy. internationally, we expect flat revenues in 2025 as compared to 2024, with growth in most markets offset by activity reduction in mexico. we also expect international oil and natural gas exploration and production activity to grow year over year. we expect our north america revenue to decrease in 2025 low to mid–single digits from 2024 levels which we believe will be driven in part by lower negotiated prices for a portion of our fleet. hal 2024 form 10-k | 28 item 7 | results of operations in 2024 compared to 2023 results of operations in 2024 compared to 2023 favorablepercentage millions of dollars20242023(unfavorable)change revenue: by operating segment: completion and production$13,251 $13,689 $(438)(3)% drilling and evaluation9,693 9,329 364 4 total revenue$22,944 $23,018 $(74)— % by geographic region: north america$9,626 $10,492 $(866)(8)% latin america4,211 3,987 224 6 europe/africa/cis3,003 2,861 142 5 middle east/asia6,104 5,678 426 8 total revenue$22,944 $23,018 $(74)— % operating income: by operating segment: completion and production$2,709 $2,835 $(126)(4)% drilling and evaluation1,608 1,543 65 4 total operations4,317 4,378 (61)(1) corporate and other(255)(244)(11)(5) sap s4 upgrade expense(124)(51)(73)n/m impairments and other charges(116)— (116)n/m total operating income$3,822 $4,083 $(261)(6) % n/m = not meaningful operating segments completion and production completion and production revenue was $13.3 billion in 2024, a decrease of $438 million, or 3%, compared to 2023. operating income was $2.7 billion in 2024, a 4% decrease from $2.8 billion in 2023. these results were driven by lower pressure pumping services in u.s. land. partially offsetting these declines were increased activity across multiple product service lines in mexico and the middle east, improved artificial lift activity in u.s. land, and higher cementing activity in brazil and norway. drilling and evaluation drilling and evaluation revenue was $9.7 billion in 2024, an increase of $364 million, or 4%, from 2023. operating income was $1.6 billion in 2024, an increase of $65 million, or 4%, compared to 2023. these results were driven by increased drilling activity in the western hemisphere, higher drilling-related services in qatar and the united arab emirates, as well as improved activity across multiple product service lines in kuwait and the north sea. partially offsetting these improvements were declined wireline activity in north america, decreased fluid services in brazil, and lower activity across multiple product service lines in asia pacific. geographic regions north america north america revenue was $9.6 billion in 2024, an 8% decrease compared to 2023, resulting from lower pressure pumping services in u.s. land, reduced wireline activity, and decreased fluid services in the region. these declines were partially offset by higher drilling activity in the region and improved artificial lift activity in u.s. land. hal 2024 form 10-k | 29 item 7 | results of operations in 2024 compared to 2023 latin america latin america revenue was $4.2 billion in 2024, a 6% increase compared to 2023, resulting from higher activity across multiple product service lines in argentina, mexico, and ecuador. partially offsetting these improvements were lower activity across multiple product service lines in colombia and lower completion tool sales in brazil. europe/africa/cis europe/africa/cis revenue was $3.0 billion in 2024, a 5% increase compared to 2023, resulting from higher activity across multiple product service lines in the north sea and increased activity across multiple product service lines in italy. partially offsetting these improvements were declines in activity across multiple product service lines in west africa. middle east/asia middle east/asia revenue was $6.1 billion in 2024, an 8% increase compared to 2023, resulting from higher activity across multiple product service lines in kuwait and saudi arabia, higher well construction activity in the united arab emirates, and increased activity across multiple product service lines in australia. partially offsetting these improvements were lower activity across multiple product service lines in asia pacific and iraq. other operating items impairments and other charges. during 2024, we took a pre-tax charge of $116 million primarily related to severance costs, an impairment of assets held for sale, expenses related to a cybersecurity incident, a gain on a fair value adjustment of an equity investment, and other items. see notes to consolidated financial statements, note 2 for further discussion on these charges. sap s4 upgrade expense. as previously mentioned, during 2023 we began our migration to sap s4, which we expect to complete in the first half of 2026. in 2024 and 2023, we recognized $124 million and $51 million of expense on our sap s4 migration, respectively. hal 2024 form 10-k | 30 item 7 | results of operations in 2024 compared to 2023 nonoperating items argentina blue chip swap. the central bank of argentina maintains currency controls that limit our ability to access u.s. dollars in argentina and remit cash from our argentine operations. the execution of certain trades known as blue chip swaps, effectively results in a parallel u.s. dollar exchange rate. for the years ended december 31, 2024 and december 31, 2023, we entered into blue chip swap transactions, which resulted in $8 million and $110 million pre-tax losses on investment, respectively. argentina currency impact. argentina devalued its peso by more than 50% during december 2023. consequently, we incurred a loss of $131 million for the year ended december 31, 2023 due to the devaluation of the currency in argentina. argentina impairment on investment. in 2022 and 2023, we executed a series of loans to a third party and received notes that are to be repaid in u.s. dollars upon maturity or earlier if certain conditions are met. in 2024, we recorded a loss of $38 million due to the fair value decrease in one of the notes in march 2024, resulting from the deterioration in the outlook of the debtor’s liquidity and financial projections. this is included in “other, net” on the consolidated statements of operations. egypt currency impact. in the first quarter of 2024, the egyptian pound devalued by approximately 35% relative to the u.s. dollar. consequently, we incurred a loss of $34 million during the year ended december 31, 2024 due to the devaluation of the currency in egypt. this is included in “other, net” on the consolidated statements of operations. income tax provision. during the year ended december 31, 2024, we recorded a total income tax provision of $718 million on pre-tax income of $3.2 billion, resulting in an effective tax rate of 22.2%. the effective tax rate for 2024 was primarily impacted by our geographic mix of earnings, tax adjustments related to the reassessment of prior year tax accruals, and changes of valuation allowance on some of our deferred tax assets. during 2023, we recorded a total income tax provision of $701 million on pre-tax income of $3.4 billion, resulting in an effective tax rate of 20.8%. see notes to consolidated financial statements, note 12 for significant drivers of these tax provisions. pillar two. the oecd enacted model rules for a new global minimum tax framework, also known as pillar two, and certain governments globally have enacted, or are in the process of enacting, legislation considering these model rules. these rules did not have a material impact on our taxes for the year ended december 31, 2024. internal revenue service notice of proposed adjustment. we are subject to taxes in the united states and in numerous jurisdictions where we operate or where our subsidiaries are organized. our tax returns are routinely subject to examination by the taxing authorities in the jurisdictions where we file tax returns. in most cases we are no longer subject to examination by tax authorities for years before 2013. the only significant operating jurisdiction that has tax filings under review or subject to examination by the tax authorities is the united states. our united states federal income tax filings for tax years 2016 through 2023, including carry back of 2016 net operating losses to 2014, are currently under review or remain open for review by the internal revenue service (the irs). on september 28, 2023, we received a notice of proposed adjustment (nopa) from the irs covering our 2016 us tax return. the nopa proposed an adjustment to reclassify approximately 95% of the $3.5 billion termination fee paid to baker hughes in 2016 from an ordinary expense deduction to a capital loss. the termination fee was paid to baker hughes under the merger agreement after antitrust regulators in multiple jurisdictions failed to approve our proposed merger. it is common commercial practice to include a termination fee in a merger agreement to compensate the target for damages incurred when the acquisition does not go forward. the irs’s long-understood position at the time of the payment had been to treat such payments as an ordinary and necessary business expense. we strongly disagree with the proposed adjustment on both a factual and legal basis, and we plan to vigorously contest it. we expect that resolving this dispute will take substantial time. in 2023, we initiated the irs administrative appeals process, which is ongoing. failing a resolution through that process, the matter would ultimately be resolved by the united states federal courts. hal 2024 form 10-k | 31 item 7 | results of operations in 2024 compared to 2023 we regularly assess the likelihood of adverse outcomes resulting from tax examinations to determine the adequacy of our tax reserves, and we believe our income tax reserves are appropriately provided for all open tax years. we cannot assure you that the matter will be determined in our favor or against us, and if the matter is ultimately determined unfavorably to us, it could have a material adverse impact on our results of operations and cash flows. based on tax attributes currently available, we estimate that, should the irs’s position prevail through its appellate process and subsequent litigation, the proposed adjustment could result in cash taxes due of approximately $640 million (plus interest thereon in the case of amounts due for previous tax years). our estimates are calculated under current tax law and on the bases of our assumptions regarding taxable income and loss and other tax attributes over the relevant period, which law could change and which assumptions could and likely will differ materially from actual results. in any event, no payment of any additional tax is currently required, nor do we anticipate that the proposed adjustment would materially and adversely impact our ability to meet our expected uses of cash, including future capital expenditures, working capital investments, and scheduled debt repayments, or our ability to return cash to shareholders, even if a final determination of the matter is reached that is adverse to us. hal 2024 form 10-k | 32 item 7 | results of operations in 2023 compared to 2022 results of operations in 2023 compared to 2022 information related to the comparison of our operating results between the years 2023 and 2022 is included in “item 7. management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations” of our 2023 form 10-k filed with the sec and is incorporated by reference into this annual report on form 10-k. hal 2024 form 10-k | 33 item 7 | critical accounting estimates critical accounting estimates the preparation of financial statements requires the use of judgments and estimates. our critical accounting policies are described below to provide a better understanding of how we develop our assumptions and judgments about future events and related estimates and how they can impact our financial statements. a critical accounting estimate is one that requires our most difficult, subjective, or complex judgments and assessments and is fundamental to our results of operations. we identified our most critical accounting estimates to be: - forecasting our income tax (provision) benefit, including our future ability to utilize foreign tax credits and the realizability of deferred tax assets (including net operating loss carryforwards), and providing for uncertain tax positions; - legal and investigation matters; - valuations of long-lived assets, including intangible assets and goodwill; and - allowance for credit losses. we base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions we believe to be reasonable according to the current facts and circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. we believe the following are the critical accounting policies used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements, as well as the significant estimates and judgments affecting the application of these policies. this discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included in this report. income tax accounting we recognize the amount of taxes payable or refundable for the current year and use an asset and liability approach in recognizing the amount of deferred tax liabilities and assets for the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our financial statements or tax returns. we apply the following basic principles in accounting for our income taxes: - a current tax liability or asset is recognized for the estimated taxes payable or refundable on tax returns for the current year; - a deferred tax liability or asset is recognized for the estimated future tax effects attributable to temporary differences and carryforwards; - the measurement of current and deferred tax liabilities and assets is based on provisions of the enacted tax law, and the effects of potential future changes in tax laws or rates are not considered; and - the value of deferred tax assets is reduced, if necessary, by the amount of any tax benefits that, based on available evidence, are not expected to be realized. we determine deferred taxes separately for each tax-paying component (an entity or a group of entities that is consolidated for tax purposes) in each tax jurisdiction. that determination includes the following procedures: - identifying the types and amounts of existing temporary differences; - measuring the total deferred tax liability for taxable temporary differences using the applicable tax rate; - measuring the total deferred tax asset for deductible temporary differences and operating loss carryforwards using the applicable tax rate; - measuring the deferred tax assets for each type of tax credit carryforward; and - reducing the deferred tax assets by a valuation allowance if, based on available evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. our methodology for recording income taxes requires a significant amount of judgment and the use of assumptions and estimates. additionally, we use forecasts of certain tax elements, such as taxable income and foreign tax credit utilization, as well as evaluate the feasibility of implementing tax planning strategies. given the inherent uncertainty involved with the use of such variables, there can be significant variation between anticipated and actual results that could have a material impact on our income tax accounts related to continuing operations. hal 2024 form 10-k | 34 item 7 | critical accounting estimates we have operations in more than 70 countries. consequently, we are subject to the jurisdiction of a significant number of taxing authorities. the income earned in these various jurisdictions is taxed on differing bases, including net income actually earned, net income deemed earned, and revenue-based tax withholding. our tax filings are routinely examined in the normal course of business by tax authorities. the final determination of our income tax liabilities involves the interpretation of local tax laws, tax treaties and related authorities in each jurisdiction, as well as the significant use of estimates and assumptions regarding the scope of future operations and results achieved, the timing and nature of income earned and expenditures incurred. the final determination of tax audits or changes in the operating environment, including changes in tax law and currency/repatriation controls, could impact the determination of our income tax liabilities for a tax year and have an adverse effect on our financial statements. for example, we received a nopa from the irs on september 28, 2023. see “management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations – nonoperating items, internal revenue service notice of proposed adjustment” and notes to consolidated financial statements, note 12 for further information. tax filings of our subsidiaries, unconsolidated affiliates and related entities are routinely examined in the normal course of business by tax authorities. these examinations may result in assessments of additional taxes, which we work to resolve with the tax authorities and through the judicial process. predicting the outcome of disputed assessments involves some uncertainty. factors such as the availability of settlement procedures, willingness of tax authorities to negotiate, and the operation and impartiality of judicial systems vary across the different tax jurisdictions and may significantly influence the ultimate outcome. we review the facts for each assessment, and then utilize assumptions and estimates to determine the most likely outcome and provide taxes, interest, and penalties, as needed based on this outcome. we provide for uncertain tax positions pursuant to current accounting standards, which prescribe a minimum recognition threshold and measurement methodology that a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return is required to meet before being recognized in the financial statements. the standards also provide guidance for derecognition classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosure, and transition. legal and investigation matters as discussed in notes to consolidated financial statements, note 11, we are subject to various legal and investigation matters arising in the ordinary course of business. as of december 31, 2024, we have accrued an estimate of the probable and estimable costs for the resolution of some of our legal and investigation matters, which is not material to our consolidated financial statements. for other matters for which the liability is not probable and reasonably estimable, we have not accrued any amounts. attorneys in our legal department monitor and manage all claims filed against us and review all pending investigations. generally, the estimate of probable costs related to these matters is developed in consultation with internal and outside legal counsel representing us. our estimates are based upon an analysis of potential results, assuming a combination of litigation and settlement strategies. the accuracy of these estimates is impacted by, among other things, the complexity of the issues and the amount of due diligence we have been able to perform. we attempt to resolve these matters through settlements, mediation, and arbitration proceedings when possible. if the actual settlement costs, final judgments, or fines, after appeals, differ from our estimates, there may be a material adverse effect on our future financial results. we have in the past recorded significant adjustments to our initial estimates of these types of contingencies. value of long-lived assets, including intangible assets and goodwill we carry a variety of long-lived assets on our balance sheet including property, plant, and equipment, goodwill, and other intangibles. impairment is the condition that exists when the carrying amount of a long-lived asset exceeds its fair value, and any impairment charge that we record reduces our operating income. goodwill is the excess of the cost of an acquired entity over the net of the amounts assigned to assets acquired and liabilities assumed. we conduct impairment tests on goodwill annually, during the third quarter, or more frequently whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate an impairment may exist. we conduct impairment tests on long-lived assets, other than goodwill, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. when conducting an impairment test on long-lived assets, other than goodwill, we first group individual assets based on the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows from other assets. this requires some judgment. we then compare estimated future undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the asset group to its carrying amount. if the undiscounted cash flows are less than the asset group’s carrying amount, we then determine the asset group’s fair value by using a discounted cash flow analysis. this analysis is based on estimates such as management’s short-term and long-term forecast of operating performance, including revenue growth rates and expected profitability margins, estimates of the remaining useful life and service potential of the assets within the asset group, and a discount rate based on our weighted average cost of capital. an impairment loss is measured and recorded as the amount by which the asset group’s carrying amount exceeds its fair value. see notes to consolidated financial statements, note 2 for further discussion of impairments and other charges. hal 2024 form 10-k | 35 item 7 | critical accounting estimates we perform our goodwill impairment assessment for each reporting unit, which is the same as our reportable segments, the completion and production division and the drilling and evaluation division, comparing the estimated fair value of each reporting unit to the reporting unit’s carrying value, including goodwill. we estimate the fair value for each reporting unit using a discounted cash flow analysis based on management’s short-term and long-term forecast of operating performance. this analysis includes significant assumptions regarding discount rates, revenue growth rates, expected profitability margins, forecasted capital expenditures, and the timing of expected future cash flows based on market conditions. if the estimated fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, goodwill of the reporting unit is not considered impaired. if the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its estimated fair value, an impairment loss is measured and recorded. the impairment assessments discussed above incorporate inherent uncertainties, including projected commodity pricing, supply and demand for our services, and future market conditions, which are difficult to predict in volatile economic environments and could result in impairment charges in future periods if actual results materially differ from the estimated assumptions utilized in our forecasts. if market conditions deteriorate, including crude oil prices significantly declining and remaining at low levels for a sustained period of time, we could be required to record additional impairments of the carrying value of our long-lived assets in the future which could have a material adverse impact on our operating results. see notes to consolidated financial statements, note 1 for our accounting policies related to long-lived assets. allowance for credit losses we evaluate our global accounts receivable through a continuous process of assessing our portfolio on an individual customer and overall basis. this process consists of a thorough review of historical collection experience, current aging status of the customer accounts, financial condition of our customers, and whether the receivables involve retainages. we also consider the economic environment of our customers, both from a marketplace and geographic perspective, in evaluating the need for an allowance. based on our review of these factors, we establish or adjust allowances for specific customers. this process involves judgment and estimation, and frequently involves significant dollar amounts. accordingly, our results of operations can be affected by adjustments to the allowance due to actual write-offs that differ from estimated amounts. at december 31, 2024, our allowance for credit losses totaled $754 million or 13.9% of notes and accounts receivable before the allowance. at december 31, 2023, our allowance for credit losses totaled $742 million, or 13.9% of notes and accounts receivable before the allowance. the allowance for credit losses in both years is primarily comprised of accounts receivable from our primary customer in venezuela. a hypothetical 100 basis point change in our estimate of the collectability of our notes and accounts receivable balance as of december 31, 2024 would have resulted in a $54 million adjustment to 2024 total operating costs and expenses. see notes to consolidated financial statements, note 5 for further information. financial instrument market risk we are exposed to market risks primarily associated with changes in foreign currency exchange rates. we selectively manage these exposures through the use of derivative instruments, including forward foreign exchange contracts and foreign exchange options. the objective of our risk management strategy is to minimize the volatility from fluctuations in foreign currency. we do not use derivative instruments for trading purposes. the counterparties to our forward contracts and options are global commercial and investment banks. we use a sensitivity analysis model to measure the impact of potential adverse movements in foreign currency exchange rates. with respect to foreign exchange sensitivity, after consideration of the impact from our forward foreign exchange contracts and options, a hypothetical 10% adverse change in the value of all our foreign currency positions relative to the u.s. dollar as of december 31, 2024 would result in a $85 million, pre-tax loss for our net monetary assets denominated in currencies other than u.s. dollars. there are certain limitations inherent in the sensitivity analysis presented, primarily due to the assumption that exchange rates change instantaneously in an equally adverse fashion. in addition, the analysis is unable to reflect the complex market reactions that normally would arise from the market shifts modeled. while this is our best estimate of the impact of the various scenarios, this estimate should not be viewed a forecast. for further information regarding foreign currency exchange risk and other risks related to interest rates and credit risk, see notes to consolidated financial statements, note 16. hal 2024 form 10-k | 36 item 7 | environmental matters environmental matters we are subject to numerous environmental, legal, and regulatory requirements related to our operations worldwide. for information related to environmental matters, see notes to consolidated financial statements, note 11 and part i, item 1(a), “risk factors.” forward-looking information the private securities litigation reform act of 1995 provides safe harbor provisions for forward-looking information. forward-looking information is based on projections and estimates, not historical information. some statements in this form 10-k are forward-looking and use words like “may,” “may not,” “believe,” “do not believe,” “plan,” “estimate,” “intend,” “expect,” “do not expect,” “anticipate,” “do not anticipate,” “should,” “likely,” and other expressions. we may also provide oral or written forward-looking information in our statements and other materials we release to the public. forward-looking information involves risk and uncertainties and reflects our best judgment based on current information. our results of operations can be affected by inaccurate assumptions we make or by known or unknown risks and uncertainties. in addition, other factors may affect the accuracy of our forward-looking information. as a result, no forward-looking information can be guaranteed. actual events and the results of our operations may vary materially. we do not assume any responsibility to publicly update any of our forward-looking statements regardless of whether factors change as a result of new information, future events or for any other reason. you should review any additional disclosures we make in our press releases and forms 10-k, 10-q, and 8-k filed with or furnished to the sec. we also suggest that you listen to our quarterly earnings release conference calls with financial analysts. hal 2024 form 10-k | 37 item 7(a) | quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk item 7(a). quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk. information related to market risk is included in “item 7. management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations – financial instrument market risk” and notes to consolidated financial statements, note 16. hal 2024 form 10-k | 38