table of contents management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations (dollars in tables and graphs in millions) the following management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is intended to help the reader understand the results of operations and financial condition of honeywell international inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries (honeywell or the company) for the three years ended december 31, 2022. all references to notes relate to notes to consolidated financial statements in the section titled financial statements and supplementary data. a detailed discussion of the prior year 2021 to 2020 year-over-year changes is not included herein and can be found in the management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations section in the 2021 annual report on form 10-k filed february 11, 2022. business update in july 2022, we realigned certain business units within the safety and productivity solutions reportable business segment. the safety and retail business unit, which included our gas detection and safety business, combined with the advanced sensing technologies business unit to form the sensing and safety technologies business unit. this realignment provides opportunities to capitalize on shared synergies and core technologies resulting in greater value for our customers and the markets we serve. we recast historical periods to reflect this realignment. on august 16, 2022, the u.s. federal government enacted the inflation reduction act of 2022 into law. the bill includes numerous tax provisions, including a 15% corporate minimum tax as well as a 1% excise tax on share repurchases. we continue to evaluate the impact of this law on our operations; at this point, the legislation is not expected to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. macroeconomic conditions throughout 2022 and continuing into 2023, the global economy experienced and continues to experience significant supply chain disruptions, geopolitical tensions, and inflationary cost pressures. labor shortages continue to place a strain on our operations and the operations of our suppliers, creating challenges in procurement of materials and delivering products and services to our customers. in addition, in certain regions of asia, the covid-19 pandemic impacted our business operations and our customers' and suppliers' ability to operate at normal levels. we anticipate supply chain constraints and the inflationary environment to continue into 2023, and in response have implemented short-term and long-term strategies to mitigate the impact. mitigation strategies include pricing actions, material supply tracking tools, refinement of escalation processes to communicate supply shortages, and direct engagement with key suppliers to meet customer demand. where we cannot procure key components or raw materials, we redesigned existing products or developed new products to satisfy current and changing demand where feasible. redesigned products, or the development of new products, undergo product quality controls and engineering qualification prior to releasing to our customers. further, our relationships with primary and secondary suppliers allow us to reliably source key components and raw materials. we believe these mitigation strategies enable us to reduce supply risk, accelerate new product innovation, and expand our penetration in the markets we serve. additionally, due to the strenuous quality controls and product qualification we perform on new or redesigned products, we do not expect these mitigation strategies to impact product quality or reliability. during 2022, the russia-ukraine conflict introduced volatility in global financial and energy markets, increasing energy costs and exacerbating existing supply chain constraints, which added to the inflationary pressures in the global economy. we continue to actively work with our suppliers to minimize impacts of supply shortages on our manufacturing capabilities, and we implemented strategies to reduce our reliance on natural gas at critical sites in europe. if we are not successful in sustaining or executing these strategies, these macroeconomic conditions could have a material adverse effect on our consolidated results of operations or operating cash flows. see the section titled review of business segments for additional information on the impacts of inflationary cost pressures, supply chain constraints, and labor shortages to our businesses. 16 honeywell international inc. table of contents management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations see the section titled risk factors for a discussion of risks associated with the potential adverse effects of inflationary cost pressures, supply chain disruptions, and labor shortages to our businesses. russia-ukraine conflict the russia-ukraine conflict, which began in february 2022, continues to negatively impact our businesses and operations and drive global economic and political uncertainty. in response to the russian invasion of ukraine, in march 2022, we suspended substantially all of our sales, distribution, and service activities in russia and belarus (the suspension). in june 2022, we approved a plan to wind down our existing businesses and operations in russia (the wind down). during september and october 2022, we completed the sale of three entities domiciled in russia. for our two remaining entities, we are pursuing a voluntary liquidation strategy to completely exit our businesses and operations in russia. the suspension and wind down impacts all reportable business segments, with the most significant impact to our performance materials and technologies reportable business segment. in light of the humanitarian crisis created by the russia-ukraine conflict, we remain focused on efforts to assist and support our employees and their families impacted by the conflict. in march 2022, we created a ukraine relief fund, allowing employees to make donations to support organizations providing direct assistance to ukrainians and those that are assisting them in the midst of this humanitarian crisis. additionally, as the conflict began, we accelerated payroll payments to those affected by the conflict and our initial suspension of our operations. the impacts of the initial suspension and wind down to revenue, net income, net assets, or cash flow from operations for the periods recognized are not material to our consolidated results of operations and consolidated financial position. for the year ended december 31, 2021, revenue from sales in russia represented approximately 1% of our global revenues, and assets in russia represented less than 1% of our total assets. our estimate of potential future losses or other contingencies related to the suspension and wind down activities, including any guarantee payments or any litigation costs or as otherwise related to our wind down in russia, could adversely affect our consolidated results of operations in the periods recognized but would not be material with respect to our consolidated financial position. as the conflict evolves, existing conditions may worsen or other impacts that are unknown at this time may arise that could have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial position. see the section titled review of business segments for additional information on the impacts of the russia-ukraine conflict to our businesses. see note 2 acquisitions and divestitures and note 4 repositioning and other charges of notes to consolidated financial statements for additional information on the sale of our russian entities and charges recognized related to the suspension and wind down, respectively. see the section titled risk factors for additional information on potential risks to our business related to the russia-ukraine conflict. 17 honeywell international inc. management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations results of operations consolidated financial results net sales by segment 18 honeywell international inc. management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations segment profit by segment 19 honeywell international inc. management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations consolidated operating results net sales the change in net sales was attributable to the following: 2022 versus 2021 2021 versus 2020 volume(4)%1 % price10 %3 % foreign currency translation(3)%1 % acquisitions, divestitures, and other, net— %— % total % change in net sales3 %5 % 2022 compared with 2021 a discussion of net sales by reportable business segment can be found in the review of business segments section of this management discussion and analysis. net sales increased due to the following: •increased pricing, •partially offset by lower sales volumes, and •the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation, driven by the strengthening of the u.s. dollar against the currencies of the majority of our international markets, primarily the euro, british pound, turkish lira, chinese renminbi, and australian dollar. reconciliation of reported sales % change to organic sales % change and organic sales % change excluding lost russian sales 2022 versus 2021 2021 versus 2020 total reported % change in net sales3 %5 % less: foreign currency translation(3)%1 % less: acquisitions, divestitures, and other, net— %— % total organic(1) % change in net sales 6 %4 % less: sales decline attributable to lost russian sales(2) (1)%— % total organic % change excluding lost russian sales7 %4 % (1) organic sales % change, presented for all of our reportable business segments, is defined as the change in net sales, excluding the impact on sales from foreign currency translation and acquisitions, net of divestitures, for the first 12 months following the transaction date. we believe this non-gaap measure is useful to investors and management in understanding the ongoing operations and analysis of ongoing operating trends. (2) lost russian sales is defined as the year-over-year decline in sales due to the decision to wind down our businesses and operations in russia. this does not reflect management’s estimate of 2022 russian sales absent the decision to wind down our businesses and operations in russia. 20 honeywell international inc. management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations cost of products and services sold 2022 compared with 2021 cost of products and services sold increased in 2022 primarily due to the following: •higher direct and indirect material costs and higher labor costs of approximately $1.4 billion or 6%, •partially offset by lower sales volumes of approximately $1 billion or 4%. gross margin 2022 compared with 2021 gross margin increased by approximately $0.6 billion and gross margin percentage increased 80 basis points to 32.8% compared to 32.0% for the same period of 2021. 21 honeywell international inc. management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations selling, general and administrative expenses 2022 compared with 2021 selling, general and administrative expenses increased primarily due to the following: •higher repositioning and other costs of approximately $0.2 billion or 4%, including charges and accrual of reserves directly attributable to the initial suspension and wind down of businesses and operations in russia, and •higher labor costs of $0.1 billion or 2%. other (income) expense 202220212020 other (income) expense$(366)$(1,378)$(675) 2022 compared with 2021 other income decreased primarily due to the following: •lower pension and other postretirement income of approximately $0.6 billion, and •net expenses related to the narco buyout and hwi sale of approximately $0.3 billion. for additional information regarding the narco buyout and hwi sale, see note 19 commitments and contingencies of notes to consolidated financial statements. 22 honeywell international inc. management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations tax expense 2022 compared with u.s. statutory rate the effective tax rate for 2022 was higher than the u.s. federal statutory rate of 21% primarily due to the following: •tax expense from restructuring, incremental tax reserves, and state taxes, representing a 320 basis-point increase, •offset by benefits received from employee share-based payments and tax credits, representing a 210 basis-point decrease. for further discussion of changes in the effective tax rate, see note 5 income taxes of notes to consolidated financial statements. net income attributable to honeywell 2022 compared with 2021 earnings per share of common stock–assuming dilution decreased primarily due to the following: •higher repositioning and other charges, including charges and accrual of reserves directly attributable to the initial suspension and wind down of businesses and operations in russia and net charges for the narco buyout and hwi sale, impacted earnings per share by $0.86 after tax, and •higher pension mark-to-market expense and lower pension income impacted earnings per share by $0.69 after tax, •partially offset by higher segment profit from our reportable business segments impacted earnings per share by $0.53 after tax. 23 honeywell international inc. review of business segments we globally manage our business operations through four reportable business segments: aerospace, honeywell building technologies, performance materials and technologies, and safety and productivity solutions. aerospace net sales 20222021change 2022 vs. 2021 2020change 2021 vs. 2020 net sales$11,827 $11,026 7 %$11,544 (4)% cost of products and services sold7,747 7,191 7,813 selling, general and administrative and other expenses852 784 827 segment profit$3,228 $3,051 6 %$2,904 5 % factors contributing to year-over-year change2022 vs. 2021 2021 vs. 2020 netsalessegmentprofitnetsalessegmentprofit organic8 %6 %(5)%4 % foreign currency translation(1)%— %1 %— % acquisitions, divestitures, and other, net— %— %— %1 % total % change7 %6 %(4)%5 % 2022 compared with 2021 sales increased $801 million led by organic sales growth of $967 million in commercial aviation aftermarket and $379 million in commercial aviation original equipment driven by higher sales volumes in air transport and business aviation, partially offset by a decline in organic sales of $491 million in defense and space primarily due to supply chain constraints and the overall unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of $54 million. segment profit increased $177 million and segment margin percentage decreased 40 basis points to 27.3% compared to 27.7% for the same period of 2021. 24 honeywell international inc. review of business segments honeywell building technologies net sales 20222021change 2022 vs. 2021 2020change 2021 vs. 2020 net sales$6,000 $5,539 8 %$5,189 7 % cost of products and services sold3,505 3,242 3,067 selling, general and administrative and other expenses1,056 1,059 1,023 segment profit$1,439 $1,238 16 %$1,099 13 % factors contributing to year-over-year change2022 vs. 2021 2021 vs. 2020 netsalessegmentprofitnetsalessegmentprofit organic14 %23 %4 %11 % foreign currency translation(6)%(7)%3 %3 % acquisitions, divestitures, and other, net— %— %— %(1)% total % change8 %16 %7 %13 % 2022 compared with 2021 sales increased $461 million led by organic sales growth of $627 million in products and $152 million in building solutions primarily due to increased pricing, partially offset by the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of $346 million. segment profit increased $201 million and segment margin percentage increased 160 basis points to 24.0% compared to 22.4% for the same period of 2021. 25 honeywell international inc. review of business segments performance materials and technologies net sales 20222021change 2022 vs. 2021 2020change 2021 vs. 2020 net sales$10,727 $10,013 7 %$9,423 6 % cost of products and services sold7,003 6,637 6,331 selling, general and administrative and other expenses1,370 1,256 1,241 segment profit$2,354 $2,120 11 %$1,851 15 % factors contributing to year-over-year change2022 vs. 2021 2021 vs. 2020 netsalessegmentprofitnetsalessegmentprofit organic11 %15 %3 %14 % foreign currency translation(4)%(4)%2 %2 % acquisitions, divestitures, and other, net— %— %1 %(1)% total % change7 %11 %6 %15 % 2022 compared with 2021 sales increased $714 million led by organic sales growth of $684 million in advanced materials and $366 million in process solutions primarily due to increased pricing, partially offset by the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of $420 million. compared to the same period of 2021, in 2022, sales volumes decreased in process solutions by $171 million and in uop by $164 million due to the russia-ukraine conflict. segment profit increased $234 million and segment margin percentage increased 70 basis points to 21.9% compared to 21.2% for the same period of 2021. 26 honeywell international inc. review of business segments safety and productivity solutions net sales 20222021change 2022 vs. 2021 2020change 2021 vs. 2020 net sales$6,907 $7,814 (12)%$6,481 21 % cost of products and services sold4,779 5,738 4,532 selling, general and administrative and other expenses1,048 1,047 1,042 segment profit$1,080 $1,029 5 %$907 13 % factors contributing to year-over-year change2022 vs. 2021 2021 vs. 2020 netsalessegmentprofitnetsalessegmentprofit organic(9)%9 %22 %14 % foreign currency translation(3)%(3)%2 %2 % acquisitions, divestitures, and other, net— %(1)%(3)%(3)% total % change(12)%5 %21 %13 % 2022 compared with 2021 sales decreased $907 million primarily due to lower organic sales of $587 million in warehouse and workflow solutions driven by lower demand for projects, lower organic sales of $152 million in sensing and safety technologies driven by lower demand for personal protective equipment, and the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of $195 million. segment profit increased $51 million and segment margin percentage increased 240 basis points to 15.6% compared to 13.2% for the same period in 2021. during the second quarter of 2022, our productivity solutions and services business entered into a license and settlement agreement (the agreement). under the agreement, we will receive up to $360 million, paid in equal quarterly installments over eight quarters, beginning with the second quarter of 2022. the agreement provides each party a license to its existing patent portfolio for use by the other party’s existing products and resolves all patent-related litigation between the parties. 27 honeywell international inc. review of business segments corporate and all other corporate and all other primarily includes unallocated corporate costs, interest expense on holding-company debt, and the controlling majority-owned interest in quantinuum. corporate and all other is not a separate reportable business segment as segment reporting criteria is not met for the activities reported with corporate and all other and the company does not believe the results of operations are meaningful to investors. the company continues to monitor the activities in corporate and all other to determine the need for further reportable business segment disaggregation. repositioning charges see note 4 repositioning and other charges of notes to consolidated financial statements for a discussion of our repositioning actions and related charges incurred in 2022, 2021, and 2020. we recognized higher total net repositioning and other charges in 2022 compared to 2021 due to the recognition of asbestos-related charges, net of insurance and reimbursements related to the north american refractory company (narco) buyout and harbisonwalker international holdings, inc. (hwi) sale, and other charges related to the initial suspension and wind down of our business and operations in russia. cash spending related to our repositioning actions was $275 million, $382 million, and $564 million in 2022, 2021, and 2020, respectively, and was funded through operating cash flows. 28 honeywell international inc. risk factors our business, operating results, cash flows, and financial condition are subject to the material risks and uncertainties set forth below, any one of which could cause our actual results to vary materially from recent results or from our anticipated future results. macroeconomic and industry risks each of our businesses is subject to unique industry and economic conditions that may adversely affect the markets and operating conditions of our customers, which in turn can affect demand for our products and services and our results of operations. •aerospace—our aerospace business is impacted by customer buying patterns of aftermarket parts, supplier stability, factory transitions, and global supply chain capacity constraints that may lead to shortages of crucial components. operating results may be adversely affected by downturns in the global demand for air travel, which may impact new aircraft production or result in the delay or cancellation of new aircraft orders, delays in launch schedules for new aircrafts, the retirement of aircrafts, and reductions in global flying hours, which impacts air transport and regional, business, and general aviation aircraft utilization rates. operating results may also be adversely affected by any decrease in air travel demand due to regional restrictions or suspension of service for public health, safety, or environmental events, such as the effects of a global pandemic, which impacted our operating results in 2022. operating results could also be impacted by changes in overall trends related to end market demand for the product portfolio, as well as new entrants and non-traditional players entering the market. operating results in our defense and space business unit may be affected by the mix of u.s. and foreign government appropriations for defense and space programs and by compliance risks. results may also be impacted by the potential introduction of counterfeit parts into our global supply chain. •honeywell building technologies—operating results may be adversely impacted by downturns in the level of global commercial construction activity (including retrofits and upgrades), lower capital spending and operating expenditures on building projects, changes in the competitive landscape, including new market entrants and new technologies, and fluctuations in inventory levels in distribution channels. •performance materials and technologies—operating results may be adversely impacted by downturns in capacity utilization for chemical, industrial, refining, petrochemical, and semiconductor plants, our customers’ availability of capital for refinery construction and expansion, raw material demand and supply, product commoditization, continued illegal imports of hydrofluorocarbons into europe, and our ability to maximize our facilities’ production capacity and minimize downtime. periods of increased volatility in oil and natural gas prices may result in less investment by our customers and therefore, lower demand for our products and services. •safety and productivity solutions—operating results may be adversely impacted by reduced investments in process automation, safety monitoring, and plant capacity utilization initiatives, fluctuations in retail markets, a slowdown in demand for safety products, changes in the competitive landscape, including new market entrants and new technologies that may lead to product commoditization, and adverse industry economic conditions, all of which could result in lower market share, reduced selling prices, and lower margins. a significant percentage of our sales and operations is in non-u.s. jurisdictions and is subject to the economic, political, regulatory, foreign exchange, and other risks of international operations. our international operations, including u.s. exports, represent more than half of the company’s sales. risks related to international operations include exchange control regulations, wage and price controls, fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, antitrust regulations, employment regulations, foreign investment laws, import, export and other trade restrictions (such as sanctions and embargoes), differing levels of protection of intellectual property, acts of industrial espionage, violations by our employees of anti-corruption laws (despite our efforts to mitigate such risk), changes in regulations regarding transactions with state-owned enterprises, nationalization of private enterprises, acts of terrorism, acts of war, civil strife, and our ability to hire and maintain qualified staff and maintain the safety of our employees in these regions. instability and uncertainties arising from the global geopolitical environment and the evolving international and domestic political, regulatory, and economic landscape, including the potential for changes in global trade policies, such as sanctions and trade barriers, and trends such as populism, economic nationalism and negative sentiment toward multinational companies, as well as the cost of compliance with increasingly complex and often conflicting regulations worldwide, can impair our flexibility in modifying product, marketing, pricing, or other strategies for growing our businesses, as well as our ability to improve productivity and maintain acceptable operating margins. existing free trade laws and regulations provide certain beneficial duties and tariffs for qualifying imports and exports. changes in laws or policies governing the terms of foreign trade, and in particular increased trade restrictions, tariffs, or taxes on imports from countries where we manufacture products or from where we import products or raw materials, either directly or through our suppliers, could have an impact on our competitive position and financial results. 29 honeywell international inc. risk factors the u.s. continues to implement certain trade actions, including imposing tariffs on certain goods imported from china and other countries, which has resulted in retaliatory tariffs by china and other countries. additional tariffs, export controls and sanctions laws imposed by the u.s. on a broader range of imports, or further retaliatory trade measures taken by china or other countries in response, could increase the cost of our products. in response to the conflict between russia and ukraine, the u.s. and other countries imposed actions including sanctions, export and import controls, and trade restrictions with respect to russian and belarusian governments, government-related entities, and other entities and individuals. further, the russian government implemented retaliatory actions against the u.s. and other nation members of the north atlantic treaty organization (nato) as well as certain other nations. as a result of these governmental actions, in march 2022, we suspended substantially all of our sales, distribution, and service activities in russia and belarus (the suspension), and in june 2022, we decided to wind down our existing businesses and operations in russia (the wind down). given the uncertainty inherent in our remaining obligations related to our contracts with russian counterparties, we do not believe it is possible to develop estimates of reasonably possible loss in excess of current accruals for these matters. based on available information to date, the company's estimate of potential future losses or other contingencies related to the suspension and wind down activities, including guarantee payments or any litigation costs or as otherwise related to our wind down in russia, could adversely affect the company's consolidated results of operations in periods recognized but would not be material with respect to the company's consolidated financial position. as the conflict continues to evolve, existing conditions may worsen, or other impacts, including escalation of the conflict in other regions of europe where there is a material portion of our business, increased tension between russia and the u.s. and other nato members and other countries, or other impacts that are unknown at this time, could lead to increased charges and could have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial position. these impacts may result in increased costs or additional impacts on our operations and may adversely affect our ability to meet contractual and financial obligations, results of operations, and financial condition. to the extent the current conflict between russia and ukraine escalates, it may also negatively impact other risk factors disclosed in this form 10-k and further impact our financial results. such risks include, but are not limited to, adverse effects on macroeconomic conditions, including inflation and consumer spending; cybersecurity incidents and other disruptions to our information technology infrastructure or that of our customers and suppliers, including disruptions at our cloud computing, server, systems and other third party it service providers; adverse changes in international trade policies and relations; our ability to implement and execute our business strategy, particularly in eastern europe and surrounding regions; disruptions in global supply chains; energy shortages; terrorist activities targeting u.s. government contractors and/or critical infrastructure; our exposure to foreign currency fluctuations; and constraints, volatility, or disruption in the capital markets. operating outside of the u.s. also exposes us to foreign exchange risk, which we monitor and seek to reduce through hedging activities. however, foreign exchange hedging activities bear a financial cost and may not always be available to us or be successful in eliminating such volatility. finally, we generate significant amounts of cash outside of the u.s. that is invested with financial and non-financial counterparties. while we employ comprehensive controls regarding global cash management to guard against cash or investment loss and to ensure our ability to fund our operations and commitments, a material disruption to the counterparties with whom we transact business could expose honeywell to financial loss. operating outside the u.s. also exposes us to additional intellectual property risk. the laws and enforcement practices of certain jurisdictions in which we operate may not protect our intellectual property rights to the same extent as in the u.s. and may impose joint venture, technology transfer, local service or other foreign investment requirements, and restrictions that potentially compromise control over our technology and proprietary information. failure of foreign jurisdictions to protect our intellectual property rights, an inability to effectively enforce such rights in foreign jurisdictions, or the imposition of foreign jurisdiction investment or sourcing restrictions or requirements could result in loss of valuable proprietary information and could impact our competitive position and financial results. risks related to our defined benefit pension plans may adversely impact our results of operations and cash flow. significant changes in actual investment return on pension assets, discount rates, and other factors could adversely affect our results of operations and require cash pension contributions in future periods. changes in discount rates and actual asset returns different than our anticipated asset returns can result in significant non-cash actuarial gains or losses, which we record in the fourth quarter of each fiscal year, and, if applicable, in any quarter in which an interim re-measurement is triggered. with regard to cash pension contributions, funding requirements for our pension plans are largely dependent upon interest rates, actual investment returns on pension assets and the impact of legislative or regulatory changes related to pension funding obligations. 30 honeywell international inc. risk factors operational risks raw material price fluctuations, inflation, the ability of key suppliers to meet quality and delivery requirements, or catastrophic events can increase the cost of our products and services, impact our ability to meet commitments to customers and cause us to incur significant liabilities. the cost of raw materials is a key element in the cost of our products, particularly in performance materials and technologies (copper, fluorspar, tungsten salts, ethylene, aluminum, and molybdenum) and in aerospace (nickel, steel, titanium and other metals). as of december 31, 2022, aerospace and performance materials and technologies had 79% and 66%, respectively, of raw materials supply base under contract. due to supply chain constraints and labor shortages, including as a result of the ongoing covid-19 pandemic, there have been recent shortages of and inflationary trends in the cost of raw materials, including increases in labor and freight costs, for the transportation of raw materials. any inability to source necessary materials when and as needed, offset material price or labor inflation through increased prices to customers, formula-driven or long-term fixed price contracts with suppliers, productivity actions, or commodity hedges could adversely affect our results of operations. many major components, product equipment items, and raw materials, particularly in aerospace, are procured or subcontracted on a single or sole-source basis. although we maintain a qualification and performance surveillance process and we believe that sources of supply for raw materials and components are generally adequate, it is difficult to predict what effects shortages or price increases, in addition to other supply chain disruptions, may have in the future. our ability to manage inventory and meet delivery requirements may be constrained by our suppliers’ inability to scale production and adjust delivery of long-lead time products during times of volatile demand. in addition, current or future global economic uncertainty, including volatile financial markets, geopolitical instability, potential recession, and other events such as the covid-19 pandemic, may affect the financial stability of our key suppliers or their access to financing, which may in turn affect their ability to perform their obligations to us. if one or more of our suppliers experiences financial difficulties, delivery delays, or other performance problems, our resulting inability to fill our supply needs would jeopardize our ability to fulfill obligations under commercial and government contracts, which could, in turn, result in reduced sales and profits, contract penalties or terminations, and damage to customer relationships. in an effort to reduce the impact of current and future supply chain disruptions, we have implemented short-term and long-term strategies to reduce the impact of such disruptions, including development of new or redesigned products that satisfy our product quality controls and engineering qualifications and/or any applicable regulatory requirements. we cannot provide any assurance that our mitigation strategies will continue to be successful, or that we will be able to alter our strategies or develop new strategies if and as needed. we may be unable to successfully execute or effectively integrate acquisitions, and divestitures may not occur as planned. we regularly review our portfolio of businesses and pursue growth through acquisitions and seek to divest non-core businesses. we may not be able to complete transactions on favorable terms, on a timely basis, or at all. in addition, our results of operations and cash flows may be adversely impacted by (i) the failure of acquired businesses to meet or exceed expected returns, including risk of impairment; (ii) the failure to integrate multiple acquired businesses into honeywell simultaneously and on schedule and/or to achieve expected synergies; (iii) the inability to dispose of non-core assets and businesses on satisfactory terms and conditions; and (iv) the discovery of unanticipated liabilities, labor relations difficulties, cybersecurity concerns, compliance issues, or other problems in acquired businesses for which we lack contractual protections, insurance or indemnities, or, with regard to divested businesses, claims by purchasers to whom we have provided contractual indemnification. our future growth is largely dependent upon our ability to develop new technologies and introduce new products that achieve market acceptance in increasingly competitive markets with acceptable margins. our future growth rate depends upon a number of factors, including our ability to (i) identify and evolve with emerging technological and broader industry trends in our target end markets; (ii) develop and maintain competitive products; (iii) defend our market share against an ever-expanding number of competitors, including many new and non-traditional competitors; (iv) enhance our products by adding innovative features that differentiate our products from those of our competitors and prevent commoditization of our products; (v) develop, manufacture, and bring compelling new products to market quickly and cost-effectively; (vi) monitor disruptive technologies and business models; (vii) achieve sufficient return on investment for new products introduced based on capital expenditures and research and development spending; (viii) respond to changes in overall trends related to end market demand; and (ix) attract, develop, and retain individuals with the requisite technical expertise and understanding of customers’ needs to develop new technologies and introduce new products. competitors may also develop after-market services and parts for our products which attract customers and adversely affect our return on investment for new products. the failure of our technologies or products to gain market acceptance due to more attractive offerings by our competitors or the failure to address any of the above factors could significantly reduce our revenues and adversely affect our competitive standing and prospects. 31 honeywell international inc. risk factors failure to increase productivity through sustainable operational improvements, as well as an inability to successfully execute repositioning projects or to effectively manage our workforce, may reduce our profitability or adversely impact our businesses. our profitability and margin growth are dependent upon our ability to drive sustainable improvements. we seek productivity and cost savings benefits through repositioning actions and projects, such as consolidation of manufacturing facilities, transitions to cost-competitive regions, and product line rationalizations. risks associated with these actions include delays in execution, additional unexpected costs, realization of fewer than estimated productivity improvements, and adverse effects on employee morale. we may not realize the full operational or financial benefits we expect, the recognition of these benefits may be delayed, and these actions may potentially disrupt our operations. in addition, organizational changes, increased attrition, failure to create and implement a succession plan for key company positions, not retaining key talent, inability to attract new employees with unique skills, trends in rising labor costs and labor availability, labor relations difficulties, or workforce stoppage could have a material adverse effect on our business, reputation, financial position, and results of operations. as a supplier to the u.s. government, we are subject to unique risks, such as the right of the u.s. government to terminate contracts for convenience and to conduct audits and investigations of our operations and performance. u.s. government contracts are subject to termination by the government, either for the convenience of the government or for our failure to perform consistent with the terms of the applicable contract. our contracts with the u.s. government are also subject to government audits that may recommend downward price adjustments and other changes. when appropriate and prudent, we made adjustments and paid voluntary refunds in the past and may do so in the future. in addition, u.s. government contracts are subject to congressional funding, which may be unavailable due to changes in priorities or subject to continuing resolution, which may result in funding reductions, eliminations, or other effects that could impact our business. we are also subject to government investigations of business practices and compliance with government procurement and security regulations. if, as a result of any such investigation or other government investigations (including investigation of violations of certain environmental, employment, or export laws), honeywell or one of its businesses were found to have violated applicable law, then it could be suspended from bidding on or receiving awards of new government contracts, suspended from contract performance pending the completion of legal proceedings, and/or have its export privileges suspended. our operations and the prior operations of predecessor companies expose us to the risk of material environmental liabilities. mainly because of past operations and operations of predecessor companies, we are subject to potentially material liabilities related to the remediation of environmental hazards and to claims of personal injuries or property damages that may be caused by hazardous substance releases and exposures. we continue to incur remedial response and voluntary clean-up costs for site contamination and are a party to lawsuits and claims associated with environmental and safety matters, including past production of products containing hazardous substances. additional lawsuits, claims, and costs involving environmental matters are likely to continue to arise in the future. various federal, state, local, and foreign governments regulate the use of certain materials, the discharge of materials into the environment, and/or communications respecting certain materials in our products, and can impose substantial fines and criminal sanctions for violations, and require injunctive relief measures, including installation of costly equipment, implementation of operational changes to limit emissions and/or decrease the likelihood of accidental hazardous substance releases, or limiting access of our products to markets, among others. in addition, changes in laws, regulations and enforcement of policies, the discovery of previously unknown contamination or new technology or information related to individual sites, the establishment of stricter toxicity standards with respect to certain contaminants, or the imposition of new clean-up requirements or remedial techniques could require us to incur additional costs in the future that would have a negative effect on our financial condition or results of operations. 32 honeywell international inc. risk factors cybersecurity incidents could disrupt business operations, result in the loss of critical and confidential information, and adversely impact our reputation and results of operations. cybersecurity is a critical component of the company’s enterprise risk management program. global cybersecurity threats and incidents can range from uncoordinated individual attempts to gain unauthorized access to information technology (it) systems to sophisticated and targeted measures known as advanced persistent threats, directed at the company, its products, its customers, and/or its third party service providers, including cloud providers. our customers, including the u.s. government, are increasingly requiring cybersecurity protections and mandating cybersecurity standards in our products, and we may incur additional costs to comply with such demands. while we have experienced, and expect to continue to experience, these types of threats and incidents, none of them to date have been material to the company. we seek to deploy comprehensive measures to deter, prevent, detect, respond to and mitigate these threats, including identity and access controls, data protection, vulnerability assessments, continuous monitoring of our it networks and systems and maintenance of backup and protective systems. despite these efforts, cybersecurity incidents (against us or parties with whom we contract), depending on their nature and scope, could potentially result in the misappropriation, destruction, corruption or unavailability of critical data and confidential or proprietary information (our own or that of third parties), theft of funds, and the disruption of business operations. the potential consequences of a material cybersecurity incident and its effects include financial loss, reputational damage, litigation with third parties, theft of intellectual property, fines levied by the federal trade commission or other government agencies, diminution in the value of our investment in research, development and engineering, and increased cybersecurity protection and remediation costs due to the increasing sophistication and proliferation of threats, which in turn could adversely affect our competitiveness and results of operations. in addition, cybersecurity laws and regulations continue to evolve, and are increasingly demanding, both in the u.s. and globally, which adds compliance complexity and may increase our costs of compliance and expose us to reputational damage or litigation, monetary damages, regulatory enforcement actions, or fines in one or more jurisdictions. while we carry cyber insurance, we cannot be certain that our coverage will be adequate for liabilities actually incurred, that insurance will continue to be available to us on economically reasonable terms, or at all, or that any insurer will not deny coverage as to any future claim. the development of technology products and services presents security and safety risks. an increasing number of our products, services, and technologies are delivered with internet of things (iot) capabilities and the accompanying interconnected device networks, which include sensors, data and advanced computing capabilities. we have developed product software designs that we believe are less susceptible to cyber-attacks, but despite these efforts, if our products and services that include iot solutions do not work as intended or are compromised, the possible consequences include financial loss, reputational damage, exposure to legal claims or enforcement actions, theft of intellectual property, and diminution in the value of our investment in research, development and engineering, which in turn could adversely affect our competitiveness and results of operations. data privacy, data protection, and information security may require significant resources and present certain risks. we collect, store, have access to and otherwise process certain confidential or sensitive data, including proprietary business information, personal data or other information that is subject to privacy and security laws, regulations and/or customer-imposed controls. despite our efforts to protect such data, we may be vulnerable to material security breaches, theft, misplaced or lost data, programming errors, or employee errors that could potentially lead to the compromising of such data, improper use of our systems, software solutions or networks, unauthorized access, use, disclosure, modification or destruction of information, defective products, production downtimes and operational disruptions. in addition, we operate in an environment in which there are different and potentially conflicting data privacy laws in effect in the various u.s. states and foreign jurisdictions in which we operate and we must understand and comply with each law and standard in each of these jurisdictions while ensuring the data is secure. for example, european laws require us to have an approved legal mechanism to transfer personal data out of europe; the european union general data protection regulation imposes stringent requirements in how we collect and process personal data and provides for significantly greater penalties for noncompliance; and several other states and countries have passed or are considering laws that require personal data relating to their residents or citizens to be maintained on local servers and impose additional data transfer restrictions. government enforcement actions can be costly and interrupt the regular operation of our business, and violations of data privacy laws can result in fines, reputational damage, and civil lawsuits, any of which may adversely affect our business, reputation, and financial statements. 33 honeywell international inc. risk factors a material disruption of our operations, particularly at our manufacturing facilities or within our information technology infrastructure, could adversely affect our business. our facilities, supply chains, distribution systems, and information technology systems are subject to catastrophic loss due to natural disasters or other disruptions, including hurricanes and floods, which may be exacerbated by the effects of climate change, power outages, fires, explosions, terrorism, equipment failures, sabotage, cyber incidents, any potential effects of climate change and adverse weather conditions, including water scarcity, labor disputes, critical supply failure, inaccurate downtime forecast, political disruption, public health crises, like a regional or global pandemic, and other reasons, which can result in undesirable consequences, including financial losses and damaged relationships with customers. the covid-19 pandemic has disrupted and may continue to disrupt our supply chain, distribution channels, production facilities, operations and customer demand, which has negatively impacted our operations and adversely affected our business and could continue to do so. we employ information technology systems and networks to support the business and rely on them to process, transmit and store electronic information, and to manage or support a variety of business processes and activities. disruptions to our information technology infrastructure from system failures, shutdowns, power outages and energy shortages, telecommunication or utility failures, cybersecurity incidents, and other events, including disruptions at our cloud computing, server, systems and other third party it service providers, could interfere with our operations, interrupt production and shipments, damage customer and business partner relationships, and negatively impact our reputation. in addition, the insurance we maintain may not be adequate to cover our losses resulting from any business interruption, including those resulting from a natural disaster or other severe weather event, and recurring extreme weather events or other adverse events could reduce the availability or increase the cost of insurance. concentrations of credit, counterparty and market risk may adversely affect our results of operations and financial condition. we maintain long-term contractual relationships with many of our customers, suppliers, and other counterparties. while we monitor the financial health of these counterparties, we are exposed to credit and market risks of such counterparties, including those concentrated in the same or similar industries and geographic regions. changes in political and economic conditions could also lead to concerns about the creditworthiness of counterparties and their ability to pay in the same or similar industry or geography, impacting our ability to renew our long-term contractual arrangements or collect amounts due under these arrangements. among other factors, changes in economic conditions, including an economic downturn or recession, could also result in the credit deterioration or insolvency of a significant counterparty. we are impacted by increasing stakeholder interest in public company performance, disclosure, and goal-setting with respect to environmental, social, and governance (esg) matters. in response to growing customer, investor, employee, governmental, and other stakeholder interest in our esg practices, including our procedures, standards, performance metrics, and goals, we have increased reporting of our esg programs and performance and have established and announced goals and other objectives related to esg matters. these goal statements reflect our current plans and aspirations and are not guarantees that we will be able to achieve them. our ability to achieve any goal or objective, including with respect to esg initiatives, is subject to numerous risks, many of which are outside of our control. examples of such risks include: (i) the availability and cost of low- or non-carbon-based energy sources and technologies, (ii) evolving regulatory requirements affecting esg standards or disclosures, (iii) the availability of suppliers that can meet our sustainability, diversity and other standards, (iv) our ability to recruit, develop, and retain diverse talent in our labor markets, and (v) the impact of our organic growth and acquisitions or dispositions of businesses or operations. in addition, standards for tracking and reporting on esg matters have not been harmonized and continue to evolve. our processes and controls for reporting of esg matters may not always comply with evolving and disparate standards for identifying, measuring, and reporting esg metrics, our interpretation of reporting standards may differ from those of others, and such standards may change over time, any of which could result in significant revisions to our performance metrics, goals or reported progress in achieving such goals. in addition, certain of our products and services, including offerings in our defense and space business unit, are unattractive to certain investors and may cause us to be increasingly subject to esg-driven investment practices that preclude investment in our debt and equity. if our esg practices or business portfolio do not meet evolving investor or other stakeholder expectations and standards, then our reputation, our ability to attract or retain employees and our attractiveness as an investment, supplier, business partner, or acquiror could be negatively impacted. our failure or perceived failure to pursue or fulfill our goals, targets, and objectives or to satisfy various reporting standards within the timelines we announce, or at all, could have similar negative impacts and expose us to government enforcement actions and private litigation. global climate change and related regulations and changes in customer demand could negatively affect our operations and our business. the effects of climate change could create financial risks to our business. for example, the effects of physical impacts of climate change could disrupt our operations by impacting the availability and cost of materials needed for manufacturing, exacerbate existing risks to our supply chain, disrupt our operations, and increase insurance and other operating costs. these factors may impact our decisions to construct new facilities or maintain existing facilities in areas most prone to physical climate risks. we could also face indirect financial risks passed through the supply chain and disruptions that could result in increased prices for our products and the resources needed to produce them. 34 honeywell international inc. risk factors the growing focus on addressing global climate change has resulted in more regulations designed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and more customer demand for products and services that have a lower carbon footprint or that help businesses and consumers reduce carbon emissions throughout their value chains. these regulations tend to be implemented under global, national and sub-national climate objectives or policies, and target the global warming potential of refrigerants, energy efficiency, and the combustion of fossil fuels. although we offer and continue to invest in developing solutions that help our customers meet their carbon reduction and sustainability goals, many of our products combust fossil fuels, consume energy, and use refrigerants. regulations and carbon reduction goals which seek to reduce greenhouse gas emissions could reduce demand for such products and present a risk to our business. we may be required to further increase research and development and other capital expenditures in order to develop offerings that meet these new regulations, standards, and customer demands. there can be no assurance that our new product development efforts will be successful, that our products will be accepted by the market, or that economic returns will reflect our investments in new product development. legal and regulatory risks our u.s. and non-u.s. tax liabilities are dependent, in part, upon the distribution of income among various jurisdictions in which we operate, as well as changes in tax law or regulation. our future results of operations could be adversely affected by changes in the effective tax rate as a result of a change in the mix of earnings in countries with differing statutory tax rates, changes in tax laws, regulations and judicial rulings (or changes in the interpretation thereof), potential taxation of digital services, changes in generally accepted accounting principles, changes in the valuation of deferred tax assets and liabilities, changes in the amount of earnings permanently reinvested offshore, the results of audits and examinations of previously filed tax returns and continuing assessments of our tax exposures, and various other governmental enforcement initiatives. our tax expense includes estimates of tax reserves and reflects other estimates and assumptions, including assessments of future earnings of the company, which could impact the valuation of our deferred tax assets. in addition, our future effective tax rates could be subject to volatility or adversely affected by changes in tax laws, regulations, accounting principles, or interpretations thereof. changes in legislation or government regulations or policies can have a significant impact on our results of operations. the sales and margins of each of our reportable business segments are directly impacted by government regulations, including environmental, safety, performance, and product certification regulations. within aerospace, the operating results of commercial aviation original equipment and commercial aviation aftermarket may be impacted by, among other things, mandates of the federal aviation administration and other similar international regulatory bodies requiring the installation of equipment on aircraft. our defense and space business unit may be affected by changes in government procurement regulations. within honeywell building technologies and safety and productivity solutions, the demand for and cost of providing products, services and solutions can be impacted by fire, security, safety, health care, environmental, and energy efficiency standards and regulations. performance materials and technologies’ results of operations can be impacted by environmental and health standards, regulations, and judicial determinations, including potential per/polyfluoroalkyl substances (pfas) legislation and regulations that, if adopted, could impact the sale of certain products in our advanced materials business, without fully assessing level of risk or environmental impact. growth in all our businesses within emerging markets may be adversely impacted by the inability to acquire and retain qualified employees where local employment law mandates may be restrictive. changes in such regulations and government policies could negatively impact us; for instance, noncompliance with legislation and regulations can result in fines and penalties, and compliance with any new regulations or policies may be burdensome and/or require significant expenditures. increased focus and evolving views of lawmakers climate change and other environmental, social and governance issues could have long-term impact on our business and result of operations. increased public awareness and concern regarding global climate change and other esg matters may result in more international, regional and/or federal regulatory or other stakeholder requirements or expectations that could mandate more restrictive or expansive standards, such as stricter limits on greenhouse gas emissions, more prescriptive reporting of esg metrics, practices and targets, than the voluntary commitments that the company has adopted or require such changes on a more accelerated time frame. there continues to be a lack of consistent climate and other esg legislation, which creates economic and regulatory uncertainty; however, there has been an increasing amount of legislative and regulatory activity, particularly in the european union, united kingdom, and u.s. new or revised legal and regulatory requirements could impose significant operational restrictions and compliance requirements upon the company or its products, and could negatively impact the company’s business, capital expenditures, results of operations, financial condition, and competitive position. 35 honeywell international inc. risk factors we cannot predict with certainty the outcome of litigation matters, government proceedings and other contingencies and uncertainties. we are subject to a number of lawsuits, investigations, and disputes (some of which involve substantial amounts claimed) arising out of the conduct of our business, including matters relating to commercial transactions, government contracts, product liability (including asbestos), prior acquisitions and divestitures, employment, employee benefits plans, intellectual property, antitrust, anti-corruption, accounting, import and export, and environmental, health, and safety matters. our potential liabilities are subject to change over time due to new developments, changes in settlement strategy or the impact of evidentiary requirements, and we may become subject to or be required to pay damage awards or settlements that could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations, cash flows and financial condition. while we maintain insurance for certain risks, the amount of our insurance coverage may not be adequate to cover the total amount of all insured claims and liabilities. the incurrence of significant liabilities for which there is no or insufficient insurance coverage could adversely affect our results of operations, cash flows, liquidity, and financial condition. 36 honeywell international inc.