management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations (dollars in tables and graphs in millions) the following management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is intended to help the reader understand the results of operations and financial condition of honeywell international inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries (honeywell or the company) for the three years ended december 31, 2021. all references to notes relate to notes to consolidated financial statements in the section titled financial statements and supplementary data. on november 29, 2021, honeywell quantum solutions, a wholly-owned subsidiary of honeywell, which was previously reported within the aerospace reportable business segment, combined with cambridge quantum computing, to form quantinuum. following the combination, honeywell consolidated and reported quantinuum within corporate and all other. quantinuum is considered a separate operating segment, but does not meet aggregation criteria for presentation as a separate reportable segment. for this reason, it is reported within corporate and all other, which is not considered a reportable business segment. for the eleven months ended november 30, 2021 and the years ended december 31, 2020 and 20219, honeywell quantum solutions incurred operating losses of $50 million, $41 million, and $36 million, respectively. prior to november 29, 2021, our aerospace business segment included the operating results of honeywell quantum solutions. quantinuum is well-positioned to lead the quantum computing industry by offering advanced, fully integrated hardware and software solutions at an unprecedented pace, scale, and level of performance to large high-growth markets worldwide. quantinuum supports customer needs for improved computation in cyber security, drug discovery and delivery, material science, finance, and optimization across all major industrial markets. a detailed discussion of the prior year 2020 to 2019 year-over-year changes is not included herein and can be found in the management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations section in the 2020 annual report on form 10-k filed february 12, 2021. covid-19 update in 2021, the covid-19 pandemic continues to have a significant impact around the world. many jurisdictions worldwide continue to distribute vaccines as a method to limit and control infections; however, the pandemic continues to impact our business as vaccine efforts face challenges and new variants of the virus emerge. select governments continue to place restrictions on businesses (impacting manufacturing capabilities and distribution channels). global supply shortages emerged for certain products (including electrical components), leading to delays in delivery schedules. historically reliable supply chains were disrupted, impacting certain of our businesses. in certain parts of the world, labor shortages intensified. these events continue to impact our business operations. as new variants of the virus emerge, we remain cautious as many factors remain unpredictable. we actively monitor and respond to the changing conditions created by the pandemic, with focus on prioritizing the health and safety of our employees, dedicating resources to support our communities, and innovating to address our customers’ needs. in 2021, we actively promoted vaccines as a mechanism to protect the health of our employees. we supported several large-scale vaccination events to provide vaccines to our employees, their families, and the surrounding communities. in situations when local medical care was unavailable, we provided additional support to our employees to ensure they received the medical care needed. we continue to adapt our safety and hygiene protocols to enable our manufacturing employees to operate safely through the pandemic. we also continue to utilize our procedures for a phased return of our employees to our office sites, and in many parts of the world, we returned our non-manufacturing employees to the workplace. however, in certain countries, our non-manufacturing employees continue to work from home (for roles that allow for remote work). on september 9, 2021, president biden announced several initiatives to drive higher vaccination rates in the u.s., including an executive order for u.s. government contractors to mandate vaccination against covid-19. in response to these initiatives, we implemented a vaccine mandate requiring all u.s.-based employees at work locations that work on or in support of contracts with the u.s. government to receive their first vaccine dose, or a medical or religious exemption, by january 4, 2022. similarly, the company adopted a vaccine mandate for all prospective and future employees and announced a timeline for a vaccine mandate for our remaining u.s. employees. we continue to monitor and respond to the changing conditions created by the pandemic. honeywell international inc. 15 management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations employee health, safety, and economic wellness we continue to monitor the covid-19 situation and its impacts globally. we are prioritizing the health and safety of our employees. out of an abundance of caution for the health of our employees and to support local government initiatives to stem the spread of the virus, we implemented several precautions at various sites around the world. these include, but are not limited to: •limiting visitor site access to business-essential purposes; •enabling employees to work from home wherever and whenever required or appropriate; •continuously updating travel guidance, according to latest developments; and •complying with all local health authority guidance or regulations and our own protocols, including requesting employees to comply with self-quarantine requirements whenever advisable. plant productivity and safety we continue to operate our manufacturing facilities with minimal disruption in our productivity. as of december 31, 2021, all of our manufacturing sites were operating at normal production levels. we continue to provide essential services and produce essential goods around the world. we employ standards such as screening checks, use of masks, face coverings, and other safety equipment and social distancing practices along production lines in our production facilities at all times in compliance with local government requirements and cdc guidelines. we take appropriate actions including disinfecting and quarantine procedures when a suspected covid-19 case is identified. customers and suppliers current global economic conditions due to covid-19 continue to impact our customers’ and suppliers’ ability to operate at normal levels. we continue to work with our suppliers to manage our supply chain disruptions and limit our exposure. we also work closely with our customers to manage expectations and meet their demand needs. see the section titled risk factors for a discussion of risks associated with the potential adverse effects of the covid-19 pandemic, including the impact of any applicable vaccine mandates. 16 honeywell international inc. management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations results of operations consolidated financial results net sales by segment honeywell international inc. 17 management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations segment profit by segment 18 honeywell international inc. management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations consolidated operating results net sales the change in net sales was attributable to the following: 2021 versus 2020 2020 versus 2019 volume1 %(12)% price3 %1 % foreign currency translation1 %— % acquisitions/divestitures— %— % 5 %(11)% 2021 compared with 2020 a discussion of net sales by segment can be found in the review of business segments section of this management discussion and analysis. net sales increased due to the following: •favorable pricing and price increases to offset the rising cost of materials, •the favorable impact of foreign currency translation, driven by the weakening of the u.s. dollar against the currencies of the majority of our international markets, primarily the euro, british pound, chinese renminbi, canadian dollar, and australian dollar, and •higher sales volumes due to an increase in demand for certain products and services as the global economy showed signs of recovery from the covid-19 pandemic. honeywell international inc. 19 management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations cost of products and services sold 2021 compared with 2020 cost of products and services sold increased in 2021 primarily due to the following: •higher direct and indirect material costs of approximately $1,350 million, due in part to supply chain constraints, and •higher repositioning and other costs of approximately $150 million, •partially offset by cost actions to improve productivity of approximately $380 million. gross margin 2021 compared with 2020 gross margin increased due to the following: •favorable pricing, •higher productivity, •the favorable impact of foreign currency translation, and •increased demand for our products, •partially offset by higher direct and indirect material costs, higher repositioning and other costs of approximately $150 million, and a larger portion of our sales being driven by our safety and productivity solutions segment. 20 honeywell international inc. management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations selling, general and administrative expenses 2021 compared with 2020 selling, general and administrative expenses and selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of net sales changed due to the following: •higher expenses due to increased sales volumes and labor expense, •partially offset by higher productivity, including lower costs resulting from repositioning actions. honeywell international inc. 21 management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations other (income) expense 202120202019 other (income) expense$(1,378)$(675)$(1,065) 2021 compared with 2020 other (income) expense increased due to the following: •prior year non-cash charges associated with the reduction in value of reimbursement receivables due from garrett, •higher pension income, and •gain on sale of the retail footwear business, •partially offset by the recognition of an expense related to uop matters and increased foreign exchange expense. see note 19 commitments and contingencies of notes to the consolidated financial statements for additional information on uop matters. tax expense 2021 compared with 2020 the effective tax rate for 2021 was higher than the u.s. federal statutory rate of 21% primarily due to the following: •accrued withholding taxes related to unremitted foreign earnings, •the establishment of a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets not expected to be realized, and •incremental tax reserves and state taxes, •partially offset by the tax impact of restructuring. for further discussion of changes in the effective tax rate, see note 5 income taxes of notes to consolidated financial statements. 22 honeywell international inc. management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations net income attributable to honeywell 2021 compared with 2020 earnings per share of common stock–assuming dilution increased due to the following: •higher segment profit, •prior year non-cash charges associated with the reduction in value of reimbursement receivables due from garrett, •higher pension income, •gain on sale of the retail footwear business, and •favorable impact of lower share count, •partially offset by higher income taxes, an expense related to uop matters, and higher foreign exchange expense. honeywell international inc. 23 review of business segments we globally manage our business operations through four segments: aerospace, honeywell building technologies, performance materials and technologies, and safety and productivity solutions. aerospace net sales 20212020change 2021 vs. 2020 2019change 2020 vs. 2019 net sales$11,026 $11,544 (4)%$14,054 (18)% cost of products and services sold7,191 7,813 9,398 selling, general and administrative and other expenses784 827 1,049 segment profit$3,051 $2,904 5 %$3,607 (19)% factors contributing to year-over-year change2021 vs. 2020 2020 vs. 2019 netsalessegmentprofitnetsalessegmentprofit organic(1) (5)%4 %(18)%(20)% foreign currency translation1 %— %— %— % acquisitions, divestitures and other, net— %1 %— %1 % total % change(4)%5 %(18)%(19)% (1) organic sales % change, presented for all of our reportable business segments, is defined as the change in net sales, excluding the impact on sales from foreign currency translation and acquisitions, net of divestitures, for the first 12 months following the transaction date. we believe this non-gaap measure is useful to investors and management in understanding the ongoing operations and analysis of ongoing operating trends. 2021 compared with 2020 sales decreased due to lower demand from our commercial oems, and domestic and international defense, partially offset by higher demand for our aftermarket products and services, and favorable pricing. •commercial aviation original equipment sales decreased 11% (decreased 12% organic) due to lower demand in air transport and regional and business aviation. •commercial aviation aftermarket sales increased 9% (increased 9% organic) due to higher demand in business aviation. •defense and space sales decreased 11% (decreased 12% organic) driven by lower demand in u.s. and international defense and supply chain constraints. 24 honeywell international inc. cost of products and services sold decreased due to lower sales volumes and higher productivity. segment profit increased due to favorable pricing, higher productivity, and higher sales volume of higher margin products and services, partially offset by overall lower sales volume. honeywell building technologies net sales 20212020change 2021 vs. 2020 2019change 2020 vs. 2019 net sales$5,539 $5,189 7 %$5,717 (9)% cost of products and services sold3,242 3,067 3,444 selling, general and administrative and other expenses1,059 1,023 1,108 segment profit$1,238 $1,099 13 %$1,165 (6)% factors contributing to year-over-year change2021 vs. 2020 2020 vs. 2019 netsalessegmentprofitnetsalessegmentprofit organic4 %11 %(9)%(5)% foreign currency translation3 %3 %— %(1)% acquisitions, divestitures and other, net— %(1)%— %— % total % change7 %13 %(9)%(6)% 2021 compared with 2020 sales increased primarily due to the favorable impact of foreign currency translation and favorable pricing. •sales in products increased 9% (increased 6% organic) due to higher demand for certain of our product offerings, and the favorable impact of foreign currency translation. •sales in building solutions increased 4% (flat on an organic basis) due to higher demand for our services businesses, and the favorable impact of foreign currency translation. cost of products and services sold increased primarily due to the rising cost of materials and the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation, partially offset by higher productivity. segment profit increased primarily due to higher productivity, higher demand for certain products and services, favorable pricing, and the favorable impact of foreign currency translation, partially offset by the rising cost of materials. honeywell international inc. 25 review of business segments performance materials and technologies net sales 20212020change 2021 vs. 2020 2019change 2020 vs. 2019 net sales$10,013 $9,423 6 %$10,834 (13)% cost of products and services sold6,637 6,331 6,989 selling, general and administrative and other expenses1,256 1,241 1,412 segment profit$2,120 $1,851 15 %$2,433 (24)% factors contributing to year-over-year change2021 vs. 2020 2020 vs. 2019 netsalessegmentprofitnetsalessegmentprofit organic3 %14 %(13)%(24)% foreign currency translation2 %2 %— %— % acquisitions, divestitures and other, net1 %(1)%— %— % total % change6 %15 %(13)%(24)% 2021 compared with 2020 sales increased due to the impact of foreign currency translation, higher demand for certain products, and the acquisition of sparta systems. •uop sales increased 8% (increased 6% organic) due to higher demand for oil and gas products and services, and the favorable impact of foreign currency translation. •process solutions sales were flat (decreased 4% organic). the acquisition of sparta systems and the favorable impact of foreign currency translation was offset by lower demand for projects and services. •advanced materials sales increased 15% (increased 13% organic) due to higher demand for fluorine products and the favorable impact of foreign currency translation. cost of products and services sold increased due to the rising cost of materials, partially offset by higher productivity. segment profit increased due to higher demand for certain products, favorable pricing, partially offset by the rising cost of materials. 26 honeywell international inc. review of business segments safety and productivity solutions net sales 20212020change 2021 vs. 2020 2019change 2020 vs. 2019 net sales$7,814 $6,481 21 %$6,104 6 % cost of products and services sold5,738 4,532 4,158 selling, general and administrative and other expenses1,047 1,042 1,156 segment profit$1,029 $907 13 %$790 15 % factors contributing to year-over-year change2021 vs. 2020 2020 vs. 2019 netsalessegmentprofitnetsalessegmentprofit organic22 %14 %6 %16 % foreign currency translation2 %2 %— %(1)% acquisitions, divestitures and other, net(3)%(3)%— %— % total % change21 %13 %6 %15 % 2021 compared with 2020 sales increased due to increased demand for certain products and favorable pricing. •sales in safety and retail decreased 1% (increased 5% organic) due to the sale of the retail footwear business, partially offset by increased demand for certain products. •sales in productivity solutions and services increased 27% (increased 25% organic) due to higher demand on certain products. •sales in warehouse and workflow solutions increased 50% (increased 49% organic) due to higher demand for warehouse automation and services. •sales in advanced sensing technologies increased 5% (increased 3% organic) due to higher demand for certain products and the favorable impact of foreign currency translation. cost of products and services sold increased primarily due to higher sales volumes, higher sales on lower margin products, the rising cost of materials, partially offset by the sale of the retail footwear business. segment profit increased due to higher sales volumes and favorable pricing, partially offset by higher sales of lower margin products and the rising cost of materials. honeywell international inc. 27 review of business segments corporate and all other corporate and all other primarily includes unallocated corporate costs, interest expense on holding-company debt and the controlling majority-owned interest in quantinuum. corporate and all other is not considered a separate reportable business segment as segment reporting criteria is not met for the activities reported with corporate and all other and the company does not believe the results of operations are meaningful to investors. the company continues to monitor the activities in corporate and all other to determine the need for further reportable business segment disaggregation. repositioning charges see note 4 repositioning and other charges of notes to consolidated financial statements for a discussion of our repositioning actions and related charges incurred in 2021, 2020, and 2019. cash spending related to our repositioning actions was $382 million, $564 million and $249 million in 2021, 2020, and 2019, and was funded through operating cash flows. 28 honeywell international inc. risk factors our business, operating results, cash flows and financial condition are subject to the material risks and uncertainties set forth below, any one of which could cause our actual results to vary materially from recent results or from our anticipated future results. macroeconomic and industry risks each of our businesses is subject to unique industry and economic conditions that may adversely affect the markets and operating conditions of our customers, which in turn can affect demand for our products and services and our results of operations. •aerospace—our aerospace business is impacted by customer buying patterns of aftermarket parts, supplier stability, factory transitions, and global supply chain capacity constraints that may lead to shortages of crucial components. operating results may be adversely affected by downturns in the global demand for air travel, which may impact new aircraft production or result in the delay or cancellation of new aircraft orders, delays in launch schedules for new aircraft, the retirement of aircraft and reductions in global flying hours, which impacts air transport and regional, business, and general aviation aircraft utilization rates. operating results may also be adversely affected by any decrease in air travel demand due to regional restrictions or suspension of service for public health, safety, or environmental events, such as the effects of the covid-19 pandemic, which impacted our operating results. operating results could also be impacted by changes in overall trends related to end market demand for the product portfolio, as well as new entrants and non-traditional players entering the market. operating results in our defense and space business unit may be affected by the mix of u.s. and foreign government appropriations for defense and space programs and by compliance risks. results may also be impacted by the potential introduction of counterfeit parts into our global supply chain. •honeywell building technologies—operating results may be adversely impacted by downturns in the level of global commercial construction activity (including retrofits and upgrades), lower capital spending and operating expenditures on building projects, changes in the competitive landscape including new market entrants and new technologies, and fluctuations in inventory levels in distribution channels. •performance materials and technologies—operating results may be adversely impacted by downturns in capacity utilization for chemical, industrial, refining, petrochemical, and semiconductor plants, our customers’ availability of capital for refinery construction and expansion, raw material demand and supply, product commoditization, continued illegal imports of hydrofluorocarbons into europe, and our ability to maximize our facilities’ production capacity and minimize downtime. periods of increased volatility in oil and natural gas prices may result in less investment by our customers and therefore, lower demand for our products and services. •safety and productivity solutions—operating results may be adversely impacted by reduced investments in process automation, safety monitoring, and plant capacity utilization initiatives, fluctuations in retail markets, a slowdown in demand for safety products, changes in the competitive landscape, including new market entrants and technology that may lead to product commoditization, and adverse industry economic conditions, all of which could result in lower market share, reduced selling prices and lower margins. the global covid-19 pandemic and related impacts have adversely affected and may continue to adversely affect, our business, financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flow. the continued global spread of covid-19 creates significant volatility, uncertainty and economic disruption that have impacted our business, operations, and financial results and may continue to do so. the extent to which the covid-19 pandemic will continue to impact our business, operations and financial results will depend on numerous evolving factors that we may not be able to accurately predict, including: the duration, scope and severity of the pandemic, including emergence and impact of new variants; some of which have been, and may be in the future, more virulent or transmissible than the initial strain, and any continued increase in cases globally and across the united states in particular, including breakthrough infections among the fully vaccinated population, as well as the timing, availability, and acceptance of effective medical treatments and vaccines; the pace of vaccine deployment; the impact of vaccine mandates, governmental, business and individual decisions and actions; the impact of the pandemic on economic activity; and the extent to which we or our employees, customers, suppliers, service providers or other business partners may be prevented from conducting normal business activities, including due to shutdowns or other restrictive measures that may be requested or mandated by governmental authorities. these factors could, among other things, continue to disrupt (i) the purchasing, contracting and payment behaviors of our customers and their end-users; (ii) our operations, including our manufacturing activities, the shipment of our products, and the performance of our suppliers and service providers; and (iii) our liquidity and cash flow. honeywell international inc. 29 risk factors risks arising from the covid-19 pandemic impacting our business and that may continue to impact our business, financial condition, results of operations and prospects include, among other things: •customer risk—existing and potential customers and their end-users may continue to take actions to reduce or suspend operations, reduce or delay spending, cancel contracts, or cut costs in a manner that reduces demand for our products and services. in particular, lower demand for air travel may continue to cause our customers to delay or suspend spending in connection with the manufacturing, repair, overhaul or servicing of aircraft, and there may be long-term deterioration in demand for air travel that could impact our business beyond the current covid-19 health crisis. customers may also continue to attempt to renegotiate contracts and obtain concessions, face financial constraints on their ability to make payments to us on a timely basis or at all, or enter into bankruptcy or discontinue their business operations, and we may continue to be required to discount the pricing of our products. in addition, unfavorable customer site conditions, such as closure of or access restrictions to customer facilities, and disruptions to our customers’ third-party logistics, warehousing, inventory management, and distribution services may continue to limit our ability to sell products, meet billing milestones, or provide services. •operations risk—the closure of our facilities, restrictions inhibiting our employees’ ability to access those facilities, materials and labor shortages, and disruptions to the ability of our suppliers or service providers to deliver goods or services to us (including as a result of supplier facility closures or access restrictions, disruptions to their supply chains, and supplier liquidity or bankruptcy risk) could further disrupt our ability to provide our services and solutions and result in, among other things, higher costs which may not be recoverable under customer contracts, claims for liquidated damages in the event of delays, terminations of customer contracts and losses of revenue. because the covid-19 pandemic could adversely affect our near-term and long-term revenues, earnings, liquidity, and cash flows, we have taken and may be required to redeploy significant cost actions, including but not limited to reducing discretionary expenses (such as non-essential travel, contractors, and consultants), reducing hiring, canceling annual merit increases, reducing executive and board of director pay, reducing work schedules across the enterprise, shortening or staggering work schedules to match production with demand, and reducing staffing levels, as well as increasing supplier-based productivity and enhancing spending-limit controls. however, the extent to which our mitigation efforts are successful, if at all, is not currently ascertainable; also, our costs may not decrease at the same pace as revenue declines as many of our costs are less variable in nature, and we may not be able to or may not choose to significantly reduce them in an effort to remain focused on long-term outlook and growth opportunities. further, our management of the impact of covid-19 will continue to require significant investment of time from our management and employees, as well as resources across our global enterprise. the focus on managing and mitigating the impacts of covid-19 on our business may cause us to divert or delay the application of our resources toward new initiatives or investments, which may adversely impact our future results of operations. issues relating to the covid-19 pandemic may also result in legal claims or litigation against us. in addition, remote work has increased the frequency of cybersecurity attacks, including phishing, and malware attempts that utilize covid-19-related strategies, increasing the risk of a material cybersecurity incident that could result in the loss of proprietary or personal data, render us more vulnerable to future cybersecurity attacks, disrupt our operations, or otherwise cause us reputational or financial harm. •liquidity and cash flow risk—because of the customer and operations risks described above, our business may not continue to generate sufficient cash flow from operations in the future to service our debt and make necessary capital expenditures. if we are unable to generate such cash flow, we may need to use existing cash balances to service our debt, and if such balances are insufficient, then we may be required to engage in one or more alternatives, such as selling assets, restructuring of existing debt, issuing new debt, or obtaining additional equity capital on terms that may be onerous or highly dilutive. our ability to refinance our indebtedness will depend on the capital markets and our financial condition at such time. due to the changing landscape of the covid-19 pandemic and the responses to curb its spread, we cannot predict the ultimate impact the covid-19 pandemic will have on our business, financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flow. any recovery from the covid-19 pandemic and related economic impact may be slowed or reversed by a variety of factors. in addition, even after the covid-19 pandemic has subsided, we may continue to experience adverse impacts to our business as a result of its global economic impact, including any recession that may occur in the future. further, many of the factors disclosed under risk factors in this form 10-k are, and we anticipate will continue to be further, heightened or exacerbated by the impact of the covid-19 pandemic. a significant percentage of our sales and operations is in non-u.s. jurisdictions and is subject to the economic, political, regulatory, foreign exchange, and other risks of international operations. our international operations, including u.s. exports, represent more than half of the company’s sales. risks related to international operations include exchange control regulations, wage and price controls, antitrust regulations, employment regulations, foreign investment laws, import, export and other trade restrictions (such as sanctions and embargoes), differing levels of protection of intellectual property, acts of industrial espionage, violations by our employees of anti-corruption laws (despite our efforts to mitigate such risk), changes in regulations regarding transactions with state-owned enterprises, nationalization of private enterprises, acts of terrorism, acts of war, civil strife, and our ability to hire and maintain qualified staff and maintain the safety of our employees in these regions. instability and uncertainties arising from the global geopolitical environment and the evolving international and domestic political, regulatory, and economic landscape, including the potential for changes in global trade policies, including sanctions and trade barriers, and trends such as populism, economic nationalism and negative sentiment toward multinational companies, as well as the cost of compliance with increasingly complex and often conflicting regulations worldwide, can impair our flexibility in modifying product, marketing, pricing or other strategies for growing our businesses, as well as our ability to improve productivity and maintain acceptable operating margins. 30 honeywell international inc. risk factors existing free trade laws and regulations provide certain beneficial duties and tariffs for qualifying imports and exports. changes in laws or policies governing the terms of foreign trade, and in particular increased trade restrictions, tariffs or taxes on imports from countries where we manufacture products or from where we import products or raw materials, either directly or through our suppliers, could have an impact on our competitive position and financial results. the united states continues to implement certain trade actions, including imposing tariffs on certain goods imported from china and other countries, which has resulted in retaliatory tariffs by china and other countries. additional tariffs, export controls and sanctions laws imposed by the united states on a broader range of imports, or further retaliatory trade measures taken by china or other countries in response, could increase the cost of our products. the united states and other countries may implement actions, including trade actions, tariffs, export controls, and sanctions, against other countries or localities, including potentially against certain russian government, government-related, or other entities or individuals related to actions in ukraine, which along with any retaliatory measures could increase costs, adversely affect our operations, or adversely affect our ability to meet contractual and financial obligations. operating outside of the united states also exposes us to foreign exchange risk, which we monitor and seek to reduce through hedging activities. however, foreign exchange hedging activities bear a financial cost and may not always be available to us or be successful in eliminating such volatility. finally, we generate significant amounts of cash outside of the united states that is invested with financial and non-financial counterparties. while we employ comprehensive controls regarding global cash management to guard against cash or investment loss and to ensure our ability to fund our operations and commitments, a material disruption to the counterparties with whom we transact business could expose honeywell to financial loss. operating outside the united states also exposes us to additional intellectual property risk. the laws and enforcement practices of certain jurisdictions in which we operate may not protect our intellectual property rights to the same extent as in the united states and may impose joint venture, technology transfer, local service or other foreign investment requirements, and restrictions that potentially compromise control over our technology and proprietary information. failure of foreign jurisdictions to protect our intellectual property rights, an inability to effectively enforce such rights in foreign jurisdictions, or the imposition of foreign jurisdiction investment or sourcing restrictions or requirements could result in loss of valuable proprietary information and could impact our competitive position and financial results. risks related to our defined benefit pension plans may adversely impact our results of operations and cash flow. significant changes in actual investment return on pension assets, discount rates, and other factors could adversely affect our results of operations and require cash pension contributions in future periods. changes in discount rates and actual asset returns different than our anticipated asset returns can result in significant non-cash actuarial gains or losses, which we record in the fourth quarter of each fiscal year, and, if applicable, in any quarter in which an interim re-measurement is triggered. with regard to cash pension contributions, funding requirements for our pension plans are largely dependent upon interest rates, actual investment returns on pension assets and the impact of legislative or regulatory changes related to pension funding obligations. operational risks raw material price fluctuations, inflation, the ability of key suppliers to meet quality and delivery requirements, or catastrophic events can increase the cost of our products and services, impact our ability to meet commitments to customers and cause us to incur significant liabilities. the cost of raw materials is a key element in the cost of our products, particularly in performance materials and technologies (copper, fluorspar, tungsten salts, ethylene, aluminum, and molybdenum) and in aerospace (nickel, steel, titanium and other metals). as of december 31, 2021, aerospace and performance materials and technologies had 80% and 63%, respectively, of raw materials supply base under contract. due to supply chain constraints and labor shortages, including as a result of the ongoing covid-19 pandemic, there have been recent inflationary trends in the cost of raw materials, including increases in labor and freight costs, for the transportation of raw materials. our inability to offset material price or labor inflation through increased prices to customers, formula-driven or long-term fixed price contracts with suppliers, productivity actions or commodity hedges could adversely affect our results of operations. many major components, product equipment items, and raw materials, particularly in aerospace, are procured or subcontracted on a single or sole-source basis. although we maintain a qualification and performance surveillance process and we believe that sources of supply for raw materials and components are generally adequate, it is difficult to predict what effects shortages or price increases, in addition to other supply chain disruptions, may have in the future. our ability to manage inventory and meet delivery requirements may be constrained by our suppliers’ inability to scale production and adjust delivery of long-lead time products during times of volatile demand. in addition, current or future global economic uncertainty, including the ongoing covid-19 pandemic, may affect the financial stability of our key suppliers or their access to financing, which may in turn affect their ability to perform their obligations to us. if one or more of our suppliers experiences financial difficulties, delivery delays or other performance problems, our resulting inability to fill our supply needs would jeopardize our ability to fulfill obligations under commercial and government contracts, which could, in turn, result in reduced sales and profits, contract penalties or terminations, and damage to customer relationships. honeywell international inc. 31 risk factors 32 honeywell international inc. risk factors we may be unable to successfully execute or effectively integrate acquisitions, and divestitures may not occur as planned. we regularly review our portfolio of businesses and pursue growth through acquisitions and seek to divest non-core businesses. we may not be able to complete transactions on favorable terms, on a timely basis, or at all. in addition, our results of operations and cash flows may be adversely impacted by (i) the failure of acquired businesses to meet or exceed expected returns, including risk of impairment; (ii) the failure to integrate multiple acquired businesses into honeywell simultaneously and on schedule and/or to achieve expected synergies; (iii) the inability to dispose of non-core assets and businesses on satisfactory terms and conditions; and (iv) the discovery of unanticipated liabilities, labor relations difficulties, cybersecurity concerns, compliance issues, or other problems in acquired businesses for which we lack contractual protections, insurance or indemnities, or, with regard to divested businesses, claims by purchasers to whom we have provided contractual indemnification. our future growth is largely dependent upon our ability to develop new technologies and introduce new products that achieve market acceptance in increasingly competitive markets with acceptable margins. our future growth rate depends upon a number of factors, including our ability to (i) identify and evolve with emerging technological and broader industry trends in our target end-markets; (ii) develop and maintain competitive products; (iii) defend our market share against an ever-expanding number of competitors, including many new and non-traditional competitors; (iv) enhance our products by adding innovative features that differentiate our products from those of our competitors and prevent commoditization of our products; (v) develop, manufacture, and bring compelling new products to market quickly and cost-effectively; (vi) monitor disruptive technologies and business models; (vii) achieve sufficient return on investment for new products introduced based on capital expenditures and research and development spending; (viii) respond to changes in overall trends related to end-market demand; and (ix) attract, develop, and retain individuals with the requisite technical expertise and understanding of customers’ needs to develop new technologies and introduce new products. competitors may also develop after-market services and parts for our products which attract customers and adversely affect our return on investment for new products. the failure of our technologies or products to gain market acceptance due to more attractive offerings by our competitors or the failure to address any of the above factors could significantly reduce our revenues and adversely affect our competitive standing and prospects. failure to increase productivity through sustainable operational improvements, as well as an inability to successfully execute repositioning projects or to effectively manage our workforce, may reduce our profitability or adversely impact our businesses. our profitability and margin growth are dependent upon our ability to drive sustainable improvements. we seek productivity and cost savings benefits through repositioning actions and projects, such as consolidation of manufacturing facilities, transitions to cost-competitive regions, and product line rationalizations. risks associated with these actions include delays in execution, additional unexpected costs, realization of fewer than estimated productivity improvements, and adverse effects on employee morale. we may not realize the full operational or financial benefits we expect, the recognition of these benefits may be delayed, and these actions may potentially disrupt our operations. in addition, organizational changes, increased attrition, failure to create and implement a succession plan for key company positions, not retaining key talent, inability to attract new employees with unique skills, trends in rising labor costs and labor availability, labor relations difficulties, or workforce stoppage could have a material adverse effect on our business, reputation, financial position and results of operations. as a supplier to the u.s. government, we are subject to unique risks, such as the right of the u.s. government to terminate contracts for convenience and to conduct audits and investigations of our operations and performance. u.s. government contracts are subject to termination by the government, either for the convenience of the government or for our failure to perform consistent with the terms of the applicable contract. our contracts with the u.s. government are also subject to government audits that may recommend downward price adjustments and other changes. when appropriate and prudent, we made adjustments and paid voluntary refunds in the past and may do so in the future. we are also subject to government investigations of business practices and compliance with government procurement and security regulations. if, as a result of any such investigation or other government investigations (including investigation of violations of certain environmental, employment or export laws), honeywell or one of its businesses were found to have violated applicable law, then it could be suspended from bidding on or receiving awards of new government contracts, suspended from contract performance pending the completion of legal proceedings and/or have its export privileges suspended. honeywell international inc. 33 risk factors our operations and the prior operations of predecessor companies expose us to the risk of material environmental liabilities. mainly because of past operations and operations of predecessor companies, we are subject to potentially material liabilities related to the remediation of environmental hazards and to claims of personal injuries or property damages that may be caused by hazardous substance releases and exposures. we continue to incur remedial response and voluntary clean-up costs for site contamination and are a party to lawsuits and claims associated with environmental and safety matters, including past production of products containing hazardous substances. additional lawsuits, claims and costs involving environmental matters are likely to continue to arise in the future. various federal, state, local and foreign governments regulate the use of certain materials, the discharge of materials into the environment, and/or communications respecting certain materials in our products, and can impose substantial fines and criminal sanctions for violations, and require injunctive relief measures, including installation of costly equipment, implementation of operational changes to limit emissions and/or decrease the likelihood of accidental hazardous substance releases, or limiting access of our products to markets, among others. in addition, changes in laws, regulations and enforcement of policies, the discovery of previously unknown contamination or new technology or information related to individual sites, the establishment of stricter toxicity standards with respect to certain contaminants, or the imposition of new clean-up requirements or remedial techniques could require us to incur additional costs in the future that would have a negative effect on our financial condition or results of operations. cybersecurity incidents could disrupt business operations, result in the loss of critical and confidential information, and adversely impact our reputation and results of operations. global cybersecurity threats and incidents can range from uncoordinated individual attempts to gain unauthorized access to information technology (it) systems to sophisticated and targeted measures known as advanced persistent threats, directed at the company, its products, its customers and/or its third party service providers, including cloud providers. our customers, including the u.s. government, are increasingly requiring cybersecurity protections and mandating cybersecurity standards in our products, and we may incur additional costs to comply with such demands. while we have experienced, and expect to continue to experience, these types of threats and incidents, none of them to date have been material to the company. we seek to deploy comprehensive measures to deter, prevent, detect, respond to and mitigate these threats, including identity and access controls, data protection, vulnerability assessments, continuous monitoring of our it networks and systems and maintenance of backup and protective systems. despite these efforts, cybersecurity incidents (against us or parties with whom we contract), depending on their nature and scope, could potentially result in the misappropriation, destruction, corruption or unavailability of critical data and confidential or proprietary information (our own or that of third parties) and the disruption of business operations. the potential consequences of a material cybersecurity incident and its effects include financial loss, reputational damage, litigation with third parties, theft of intellectual property, fines levied by the federal trade commission or other government agencies, diminution in the value of our investment in research, development and engineering, and increased cybersecurity protection and remediation costs due to the increasing sophistication and proliferation of threats, which in turn could adversely affect our competitiveness and results of operations. in addition, cybersecurity laws and regulations continue to evolve, and are increasingly demanding, both in the u.s. and globally, which adds compliance complexity and may increase our costs of compliance and expose us to reputational damage or litigation, monetary damages, regulatory enforcement actions or fines in one or more jurisdictions. while we carry cyber insurance, we cannot be certain that our coverage will be adequate for liabilities actually incurred, that insurance will continue to be available to us on economically reasonable terms, or at all, or that any insurer will not deny coverage as to any future claim. the development of technology products and services presents security and safety risks. an increasing number of our products, services, and technologies are delivered with internet of things (iot) capabilities and the accompanying interconnected device networks, which include sensors, data and advanced computing capabilities. we have developed product software designs that we believe are less susceptible to cyber-attacks, but despite these efforts, if our products and services that include iot solutions do not work as intended or are compromised, the possible consequences include financial loss, reputational damage, exposure to legal claims or enforcement actions, theft of intellectual property, and diminution in the value of our investment in research, development and engineering, which in turn could adversely affect our competitiveness and results of operations. 34 honeywell international inc. risk factors data privacy, data protection, and information security may require significant resources and present certain risks. we collect, store, have access to and otherwise process certain confidential or sensitive data, including proprietary business information, personal data or other information that is subject to privacy and security laws, regulations and/or customer-imposed controls. despite our efforts to protect such data, we may be vulnerable to material security breaches, theft, misplaced or lost data, programming errors, or employee errors that could potentially lead to the compromising of such data, improper use of our systems, software solutions or networks, unauthorized access, use, disclosure, modification or destruction of information, defective products, production downtimes and operational disruptions. in addition, we operate in an environment in which there are different and potentially conflicting data privacy laws in effect in the various u.s. states and foreign jurisdictions in which we operate and we must understand and comply with each law and standard in each of these jurisdictions while ensuring the data is secure. for example, european laws require us to have an approved legal mechanism to transfer personal data out of europe; the european union general data protection regulation, which became enforceable in may 2018, superseded prior european union data protection legislation and imposes more stringent requirements in how we collect and process personal data and provides for significantly greater penalties for noncompliance; and several other states and countries have passed or are considering laws that require personal data relating to their residents or citizens to be maintained on local servers and impose additional data transfer restrictions. government enforcement actions can be costly and interrupt the regular operation of our business, and violations of data privacy laws can result in fines, reputational damage and civil lawsuits, any of which may adversely affect our business, reputation and financial statements. a material disruption of our operations, particularly at our manufacturing facilities or within our information technology infrastructure, could adversely affect our business. our facilities, supply chains, distribution systems, and information technology systems are subject to catastrophic loss due to natural disasters or other disruptions, including hurricanes and floods, power outages, fires, explosions, terrorism, equipment failures, sabotage, cyber incidents, any potential effects of climate change and adverse weather conditions, labor disputes, critical supply failure, inaccurate downtime forecast, political disruption, public health crises, like a regional or global pandemic, and other reasons, which can result in undesirable consequences, including financial losses and damaged relationships with customers. the ongoing covid-19 pandemic has disrupted and may continue to disrupt our supply chain, distribution channels, production facilities, operations and customer demand, which has negatively impacted our operations and adversely affected our business and could continue to do so. we employ information technology systems and networks to support the business and rely on them to process, transmit and store electronic information, and to manage or support a variety of business processes and activities. disruptions to our information technology infrastructure from system failures, shutdowns, power outages, telecommunication or utility failures, cybersecurity incidents, and other events, including disruptions at our cloud computing, server, systems and other third party it service providers, could interfere with our operations, interrupt production and shipments, damage customer and business partner relationships, and negatively impact our reputation. concentrations of credit, counterparty and market risk may adversely affect our results of operations and financial condition. we maintain long-term contractual relationships with many of our customers, suppliers, and other counterparties. while we monitor the financial health of these counterparties, we are exposed to credit and market risks of such counterparties, including those concentrated in the same or similar industries and geographic regions. changes in economic conditions, including the impact of the covid-19 pandemic, could also lead to concerns about the creditworthiness of counterparties in the same or similar industry or geography, impacting our ability to renew our long-term contractual arrangements or collect amounts due under these arrangements. among other factors, changes in economic conditions could also result in the credit deterioration or insolvency of a significant counterparty. honeywell international inc. 35 risk factors we are impacted by increasing stakeholder interest in public company performance, disclosure, and goal-setting with respect to environmental, social, and governance (esg) matters. in response to growing customer, investor, employee, governmental, and other stakeholder interest in our esg practices, including our procedures, standards, performance metrics, and goals, we have increased reporting of our esg programs and performance and have established and announced goals and other objectives related to esg matters. these goal statements reflect our current plans and aspirations and are not guarantees that we will be able to achieve them. our ability to achieve any goal or objective, including with respect to esg initiatives, is subject to numerous risks, many of which are outside of our control. examples of such risks include: (1) the availability and cost of low- or non-carbon-based energy sources and technologies, (2) evolving regulatory requirements affecting esg standards or disclosures, (3) the availability of suppliers that can meet our sustainability, diversity and other standards, (4) our ability to recruit, develop, and retain diverse talent in our labor markets, and (5) the impact of our organic growth and acquisitions or dispositions of businesses or operations. in addition, standards for tracking and reporting on esg matters have not been harmonized and continue to evolve. our processes and controls for reporting of esg matters may not always comply with evolving and disparate standards for identifying, measuring, and reporting esg metrics, our interpretation of reporting standards may differ from those of others, and such standards may change over time, any of which could result in significant revisions to our performance metrics, goals or reported progress in achieving such goals. in addition, certain of our products and services, including offerings in our defense and space business unit, are unattractive to certain investors and may cause us to be increasingly subject to esg-driven investment practices that preclude investment in our debt and equity. if our esg practices or business portfolio do not meet evolving investor or other stakeholder expectations and standards, then our reputation, our ability to attract or retain employees and our attractiveness as an investment, supplier, business partner, or acquiror could be negatively impacted. in addition, our failure or perceived failure to pursue or fulfill our goals, targets, and objectives or to satisfy various reporting standards within the timelines we announce, or at all, could have similar negative impacts and expose us to government enforcement actions and private litigation. legal and regulatory risks our u.s. and non-u.s. tax liabilities are dependent, in part, upon the distribution of income among various jurisdictions in which we operate. our future results of operations could be adversely affected by changes in the effective tax rate as a result of a change in the mix of earnings in countries with differing statutory tax rates, changes in tax laws (e.g., potential tax law changes in the united states to increase the u.s. corporate tax rate), regulations and judicial rulings (or changes in the interpretation thereof), potential taxation of digital services, changes in generally accepted accounting principles, changes in the valuation of deferred tax assets and liabilities, changes in the amount of earnings permanently reinvested offshore, the results of audits and examinations of previously filed tax returns and continuing assessments of our tax exposures, and various other governmental enforcement initiatives. our tax expense includes estimates of tax reserves and reflects other estimates and assumptions, including assessments of future earnings of the company, which could impact the valuation of our deferred tax assets. changes in legislation or government regulations or policies can have a significant impact on our results of operations. the sales and margins of each of our segments are directly impacted by government regulations, including environmental, safety, performance, and product certification regulations. within aerospace, the operating results of commercial original equipment and commercial aftermarket may be impacted by, among other things, mandates of the federal aviation administration and other similar international regulatory bodies requiring the installation of equipment on aircraft. our defense and space business unit may be affected by changes in government procurement regulations. within honeywell building technologies and safety and productivity solutions, the demand for and cost of providing products, services and solutions can be impacted by fire, security, safety, health care, environmental, and energy efficiency standards and regulations. performance materials and technologies’ results of operations can be impacted by environmental standards, regulations, and judicial determinations. growth in all our businesses within emerging markets may be adversely impacted by the inability to acquire and retain qualified employees where local employment law mandates may be restrictive. changes in such regulations and government policies could negatively impact us; for instance, noncompliance with legislation and regulations can result in fines and penalties, and compliance with any new regulations or policies may be burdensome and/or require significant expenditures. increased public awareness and concern regarding global climate change and other esg matters may result in more international, regional and/or federal regulatory or other stakeholder requirements or expectations that could mandate more restrictive or expansive standards, such as stricter limits on greenhouse gas emissions or more prescriptive reporting of environmental, social, and governance metrics, practices and targets, than the voluntary commitments that the company has adopted or require such changes on a more accelerated time frame. there continues to be a lack of consistent climate legislation, which creates economic and regulatory uncertainty; however, there has been an increasing amount of legislative and regulatory activity, particularly in the european union, united kingdom, and u.s. if environmental laws or regulations are either changed or adopted and impose significant operational restrictions and compliance requirements upon the company or its products, they could negatively impact the company’s business, capital expenditures, results of operations, financial condition and competitive position. 36 honeywell international inc. risk factors we cannot predict with certainty the outcome of litigation matters, government proceedings and other contingencies and uncertainties. we are subject to a number of lawsuits, investigations, and disputes (some of which involve substantial amounts claimed) arising out of the conduct of our business, including matters relating to commercial transactions, government contracts, product liability (including asbestos), prior acquisitions and divestitures, employment, employee benefits plans, intellectual property, antitrust, anti-corruption, accounting, import and export, and environmental, health and safety matters. our potential liabilities are subject to change over time due to new developments, changes in settlement strategy or the impact of evidentiary requirements, and we may become subject to or be required to pay damage awards or settlements that could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations, cash flows and financial condition. while we maintain insurance for certain risks, the amount of our insurance coverage may not be adequate to cover the total amount of all insured claims and liabilities. the incurrence of significant liabilities for which there is no or insufficient insurance coverage could adversely affect our results of operations, cash flows, liquidity and financial condition. vaccine mandates applicable to us, including the u.s. presidential executive order concerning mandatory covid-19 vaccination of u.s.-based employees of companies that work on or in support of federal contracts could have a material adverse impact on our business and results of operations. on september 9, 2021, president biden issued an executive order for u.s. government contractors to mandate vaccination against covid-19. the executive order covers u.s.-based employees at work locations that directly work on or in support of contracts with the u.s. government. on december 7, 2021, the u.s. district court for the southern district of georgia imposed a nationwide injunction of the executive order, temporarily staying all requirements in the executive order. the district court’s order was appealed to the eleventh circuit court of appeals, which declined to lift the injunction. it is expected that the u.s. government will appeal the stay to the united states supreme court. we implemented a vaccine mandate requiring all u.s.-based employees at work locations that work on or in support of contracts with the u.s. government to receive their first vaccine dose, or a medical or religious exemption, by january 4, 2022. employees who did not satisfy these requirements, which represented less than 1% of eligible employees, were placed on unpaid leave effective january 10, 2022, and were terminated if they had not taken steps to comply by january 28, 2022. the company has adopted a vaccine mandate for all u.s.-based prospective and future employees. in addition, on september 9, 2021, president biden announced that he directed the osha to develop an ets mandating either the full vaccination or weekly testing of employees for employers with 100 or more employees. the osha ets was published in the federal register on november 5, 2021, and mandates that employees of employers with 100 or more employees either become fully vaccinated by receiving the final dose of an approved covid-19 vaccine on or before january 4, 2022, or undergo weekly testing. on january 13, 2022, the u.s. supreme court re-imposed a stay of the ets and returned the case to the sixth circuit court of appeals. the majority of the supreme court held that the challengers to the ets were likely to prevail on the merits because osha exceeded its statutory authority. while the supreme court’s ruling enjoined osha from imposing its mandate, the ruling has no impact on the ability of private employers to impose their own vaccine mandate. on january 25, 2022, osha announced it was withdrawing the ets as a result of the u.s. supreme court ruling. however, honeywell has implemented a vaccine mandate for its u.s. employees who were not subject to the executive order described in the above paragraph. additional vaccine mandates, or the requirement for employees to receive vaccine booster doses, may be announced in other jurisdictions in which our businesses operate. our implementation of existing or additional vaccine mandates may result in attrition, including attrition of critically skilled labor, and difficulty securing future labor needs, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and results of operations. honeywell international inc. 37