gaap to non-gaap reconciliations the following tables provide a reconciliation of each non-gaap financial measure to the most directly comparable gaap financial measure for the periods presented: reconciliation of gaap gross profit and gross profit margin to non-gaap gross profit and gross profit margin. for the fiscal years ended october 31, 20242023 dollars% ofrevenuedollars% ofrevenue in millions gaap net revenue$30,127 100.0 %$29,135 100.0 % gaap cost of sales20,249 67.2 %18,896 64.9 % gaap gross profit9,878 32.8 %10,239 35.1 % non-gaap adjustments stock-based compensation expense49 0.1 %47 0.2 % disaster recovery(43)(0.1)%(13)— % divestiture related exit costs9 — %— — % non-gaap gross profit$9,893 32.8 %$10,273 35.3 % hewlett packard enterprise company and subsidiaries management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations (continued) reconciliation of gaap earnings from operations and operating profit margin to non-gaap earnings from operations and operating profit margin. for the fiscal years ended october 31, 20242023 dollars% ofrevenuedollars% ofrevenue in millions gaap earnings from operations$2,190 7.3 %$2,089 7.2 % non-gaap adjustments: amortization of intangible assets267 0.9 %288 1.0 % transformation costs93 0.3 %283 1.0 % disaster recovery(51)(0.2)%(12)— % stock-based compensation expense430 1.4 %428 1.5 % divestiture related exit costs35 0.1 %— — % acquisition, disposition and other related charges204 0.7 %69 0.2 % non-gaap earnings from operations$3,168 10.5 %$3,145 10.8 % reconciliation of gaap net earnings and diluted net earnings per share to non-gaap net earnings and diluted net earnings per share. for the fiscal years ended october 31, 20242023 dollars diluted net earnings per sharedollars diluted net earnings per share dollars in millions gaap net earnings attributable to hpe$2,579 $1.93 $2,025 $1.54 non-gaap adjustments: amortization of intangible assets267 0.20 288 0.22 transformation costs93 0.07 283 0.22 disaster recovery(51)(0.04)(12)(0.01) stock-based compensation expense430 0.32 428 0.33 divestiture related exit costs35 0.03 — — acquisition, disposition and other related charges204 0.16 69 0.05 gain on sale of equity interest(733)(0.55)— — adjustments for equity interests(107)(0.08)18 0.01 loss on equity investments, net13 0.01 40 0.03 adjustments for taxes(95)(0.07)(255)(0.20) other adjustments(1) 20 0.01 (52)(0.04) non-gaap net earnings attributable to hpe(2) 2,655 1.99 2,832 2.15 preferred stock dividends(25)— non-gaap net earnings attributable to common stockholders$2,630 $2,832 (1) other adjustments includes non-service net periodic benefit cost and tax indemnification and other adjustments. (2) for purposes of calculating non-gaap diluted net eps, the preferred stock dividends are added back to the non-gaap net earnings attributable to common stockholders and the diluted weighted average share calculation assumes the preferred stock was converted at issuance or as of the beginning of the reporting period. hewlett packard enterprise company and subsidiaries management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations (continued) reconciliation of net cash provided by operating activities to free cash flow. for the fiscal years ended october 31, 202420232022 in millions net cash provided by operating activities$4,341 $4,428 $4,593 investment in property, plant and equipment and software assets(2,367)(2,828)(3,122) proceeds from sale of property, plant and equipment370 602 602 effect of exchange rate changes on cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash(47)36 (279) free cash flow$2,297 $2,238 $1,794 use of non-gaap financial measures the non-gaap financial measures presented are net revenue on a constant currency basis (including at the business segment level), non-gaap gross profit, non-gaap gross profit margin, non-gaap earnings from operations, non-gaap operating profit margin (non-gaap earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue), non-gaap tax rate, non-gaap net earnings, non-gaap diluted net earnings per share, and fcf. these non-gaap financial measures are not computed in accordance with, or as an alternative to, generally accepted accounting principles in the united states. the gaap measure most directly comparable to net revenue on a constant currency basis is net revenue. the gaap measure most directly comparable to non-gaap gross profit is gross profit. the gaap measure most directly comparable to non-gaap gross profit margin is gross profit margin. the gaap measure most directly comparable to non-gaap earnings from operations is earnings from operations. the gaap measure most directly comparable to non-gaap operating profit margin (non-gaap earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue) is operating profit margin (earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue). the gaap measure most directly comparable to non-gaap income tax rate is income tax rate. the gaap measure most directly comparable to non-gaap net earnings is net earnings. the gaap measure most directly comparable to non-gaap diluted net earnings per share is diluted net earnings per share. the gaap measure most directly comparable to fcf is cash flow from operations. we believe that providing the non-gaap measures stated above, in addition to the related gaap measures provides greater transparency to the information used in our financial and operational decision making and allows the reader of our consolidated financial statements to see our financial results “through the eyes” of management. we further believe that providing this information provides investors with a supplemental view to understand our historical and prospective operating performance and to evaluate the efficacy of the methodology and information used by management to evaluate and measure such performance. disclosure of these non-gaap financial measures also facilitates comparisons of our operating performance with the performance of other companies in the same industry that supplement their gaap results with non-gaap financial measures that may be calculated in a similar manner. economic substance of non-gaap financial measures net revenue on a constant currency basis assumes no change to the foreign exchange rate utilized in the comparable prior-year period. this measure assists investors with evaluating our past and future performance, without the impact of foreign exchange rates, as more than half of our revenue is generated outside of the u.s. we believe that excluding the items mentioned below from the non-gaap financial measures provides a supplemental view to management and our investors of our consolidated financial performance and presents the financial results of the business without costs that we do not believe to be reflective of our ongoing operating results. exclusion of these items can have a material impact on the equivalent gaap measure and cash flows thus limiting the use of such non-gaap financial measures as analytic tools. see “compensation for limitations with use of non-gaap financial measures” section below for further information. non-gaap gross profit and non-gaap gross profit margin are defined to exclude charges related to the amortization of initial direct costs, stock-based compensation expense, and disaster charges. see below for the reasons management excludes each item: •stock-based compensation expense consists of equity awards granted based on the estimated fair value of those awards at grant date. although stock-based compensation is a key incentive offered to our employees, we exclude these charges for the purpose of calculating these non-gaap measures, primarily because they are non-cash expenses and our internal benchmarking analyses evidence that many industry participants and peers present non-gaap financial measures excluding stock-based compensation expense. 63 hewlett packard enterprise company and subsidiaries management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations (continued) •disaster recoveries include direct costs or recovery of these costs related to the exit of the company’s businesses in russia and belarus. hewlett packard enterprise excludes disaster recoveries from these non-gaap measures as the specific net recoveries are non-recurring charges and not indicative of the operational performance of our business. •divestiture related exit costs include expenses associated with certain disposal activities. on may 23, 2024, hpe announced plans to divest the company’s ctg business, which was completed on december 1, 2024. we consider this divestiture to be a discrete event. we exclude these costs as these expenses are non-recurring exit costs to eliminate stranded costs of this business. in addition, our internal benchmarking analyses evidence that many industry participants and peers present non-gaap financial measures excluding these charges. non-gaap earnings from operations and non-gaap operating profit margin consist of earnings from operations or earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue excluding the items mentioned above and charges relating to the amortization of intangible assets, transformation costs and acquisition, disposition and other related charges. in addition to the items previously explained above, management excludes these items for the following reasons: •we incur charges relating to the amortization of intangible assets and exclude these charges for purposes of calculating these non-gaap measures. such charges are significantly impacted by the timing and magnitude of our acquisitions. we exclude these charges for the purpose of calculating these non-gaap measures, primarily because they are noncash expenses and our internal benchmarking analyses evidence that many industry participants and peers present non-gaap financial measures excluding intangible asset amortization. although this does not directly affect our cash position, the loss in value of intangible assets over time can have a material impact on the equivalent gaap earnings measure. •transformation costs represent net costs related to the (i) hpe next plan and (ii) cost optimization and prioritization plan and include restructuring charges, program design and execution costs, costs incurred to transform our it infrastructure, net gains from the sale of real estate and any impairment charges on real estate identified as part of the initiatives. we exclude these costs as they are discrete costs related to two specific transformation programs that were announced in 2017 and 2020, respectively, as multi-year programs necessary to transform the business and it infrastructure following material divestiture transactions in 2017 and in response to covid-19 and an evolving product portfolio in fiscal 2020. the primary elements of the hpe next and the cost optimization and prioritization plan have been substantially completed by october 31, 2023. the exclusion of the transformation program costs from our non-gaap financial measures as stated above is to provide a supplemental measure of our operating results that does not include material hpe next plan and cost optimization and prioritization plan costs as we do not believe such costs to be reflective of our ongoing operating cost structure. further as our transformation costs for these plans have materially fluctuated since 2017, have been materially declining since 2021 and we do not expect to incur material transformation costs related to these programs beyond fiscal 2024, we believe non-gaap measures excluding these costs are useful to management and investors for comparing operating performance across multiple periods. •we incur costs related to our acquisition, disposition and other related charges. the charges are direct expenses, such as professional fees and retention costs, most of which are treated as non-cash or non-capitalized expenses. for fiscal 2024, these charges were driven by costs associated with the pending merger with juniper networks and the acquisition of morpheus data, in addition to prior acquisitions of axis, athonet and opsramp. for fiscal 2023, these charges were driven by acquisitions of axis, zerto, opsramp and athonet. charges may also include expenses associated with disposal activities including legal and arbitration settlements in connection with certain dispositions. we consider these acquisitions and divestitures to be discrete events. we exclude these costs as these expenses are inconsistent in amount and frequency and are significantly impacted by the timing and nature of our acquisitions and divestitures. in addition, our internal benchmarking analyses evidence that many industry participants and peers present non-gaap financial measures excluding these charges. non-gaap net earnings and non-gaap diluted net earnings per share consist of net earnings or diluted net earnings per share excluding those same charges mentioned above, as well as other items such as adjustments for equity interests, gain or loss on equity investments, other adjustments, and adjustments for taxes. the adjustments for taxes line item includes certain income tax valuation allowances and separation taxes, the impact of tax reform, structural rate adjustment, excess tax benefit from stock-based compensation, and adjustments for additional taxes or tax benefits associated with each non-gaap item. in addition to the items previously explained, management excludes these items for the following reasons: •during the six months ended april 30, 2024, we stopped reporting h3c earnings in our non-gaap results due to the planned divestiture of the h3c investment. per the terms of the original put share purchase agreement, we weren’t anticipating receiving dividends from this investment prospectively. however, on may 24, 2024, we entered into an 64 hewlett packard enterprise company and subsidiaries management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations (continued) amended and restated put share purchase agreement and an agreement on subsequent arrangements, both with unis, as described in note 19 “equity interests” to the consolidated financial statements in item 8 of part ii, which, taken together, revise the arrangements governing the aforementioned sale as previously set forth in the original put share purchase agreement. on september 4, 2024, we divested 30% of the total issued share capital of h3c, which resulted in a gain of $733 million and is included in the fiscal 2024 adjustment gain on sale of equity interest. we continue to possess the option to sell the remaining 19% of the total issued share capital of h3c at a later date. for the second half of fiscal 2024, the adjustment for equity interests incorporated the completed divestment of 30% of the total issued share capital of h3c. all periods presented include the amortization of the basis difference in our investment. for fiscal 2023, this adjustment also included our portion of intangible asset impairment charges from h3c. we believe that eliminating these amounts for purposes of calculating non-gaap financial measures facilitates the evaluation of our current operating performance. •we exclude gains and losses (including impairments) on our non-marketable equity investments because we do not believe they are reflective of normal continuing business operations. these adjustments are reflected in interest and other, net in the consolidated statements of earnings. we believe eliminating these adjustments for the purposes of calculating non-gaap measures facilitates the evaluation of our current operating performance. •we utilize a structural long-term projected non-gaap income tax rate in order to provide consistency across the interim reporting periods and to eliminate the effects of items not directly related to our operating structure that can vary in size, frequency and timing. when projecting this long-term rate, we evaluated a three-year financial projection. the projected rate assumes no incremental acquisitions in the three-year projection period and considers other factors including our expected tax structure, our tax positions in various jurisdictions and current impacts from key legislation implemented in major jurisdictions where we operate. for fiscal 2024, we used a projected non-gaap income tax rate of 15%, which reflects currently available information as well as other factors and assumptions. for fiscal 2023 we used a non-gaap income tax rate of 14%. the non-gaap income tax rate could be subject to change for a variety of reasons, including the rapidly evolving global tax environment, significant changes in our geographic earnings mix including due to acquisition activity, or other changes to our strategy or business operations. we will re-evaluate its long-term rate as appropriate. we believe that making these adjustments for purposes of calculating non-gaap measures, facilitates a supplemental evaluation of our current operating performance and comparisons to past operating results. fcf is defined as cash flow from operations, less net capital expenditures (investments in pp&e and software assets less proceeds from the sale of pp&e), and adjusted for the effect of exchange rate fluctuations on cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash. fcf does not represent the total increase or decrease in cash for the period. our management and investors can use fcf for the purpose of determining the amount of cash available for investment in our businesses, repurchasing stock and other purposes as well as evaluating our historical and prospective liquidity. compensation for limitations with use of non-gaap financial measures these non-gaap financial measures have limitations as analytical tools, and these measures should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under gaap. some of the limitations in relying on these non- gaap financial measures are that they can have a material impact on the equivalent gaap earnings measures and cash flows, they may be calculated differently by other companies (limiting the usefulness of those measures for comparative purposes) and may not reflect the full economic effect of the loss in value of certain assets. we compensate for these limitations on the use of non-gaap financial measures by relying primarily on our gaap results and using non-gaap financial measures only as a supplement. we also provide a reconciliation of each non-gaap financial measure to its most directly comparable gaap financial measure for this fiscal year and prior periods, and we encourage investors to review those reconciliations carefully.