table of contents hewlett packard enterprise company and subsidiaries management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations (continued) gaap to non-gaap reconciliations the following tables provide a reconciliation of each non-gaap financial measure to the most directly comparable gaap financial measure for the periods presented: reconciliation of gaap gross profit and gross profit margin to non-gaap gross profit and gross profit margin. for the fiscal years ended october 31, 20232022 dollars% ofrevenuedollars% ofrevenue in millions gaap net revenue$29,135 100.0 %$28,496 100.0 % gaap cost of sales18,896 64.9 %18,990 66.6 % gaap gross profit$10,239 35.1 %$9,506 33.4 % non-gaap adjustments amortization of initial direct costs— — %4 — % stock-based compensation expense47 0.2 %46 0.1 % disaster (recovery) charges(13)— %111 0.4 % non-gaap gross profit$10,273 35.3 %$9,667 33.9 % reconciliation of gaap earnings from operations and operating profit margin to non-gaap earnings from operations and operating profit margin. for the fiscal years ended october 31, 20232022 dollars% ofrevenuedollars% ofrevenue in millions gaap earnings from operations$2,089 7.2 %$782 2.7 % non-gaap adjustments: amortization of initial direct costs— — %4 — % amortization of intangible assets288 1.0 %293 1.0 % impairment of goodwill— — %905 3.2 % transformation costs283 1.0 %473 1.6 % disaster (recovery) charges(12)— %159 0.6 % stock-based compensation expense428 1.5 %391 1.4 % acquisition, disposition and other related charges69 0.2 %19 0.1 % non-gaap earnings from operations$3,145 10.8 %$3,026 10.6 % hewlett packard enterprise company and subsidiaries management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations (continued) reconciliation of gaap net earnings and diluted net earnings per share to non-gaap net earnings and diluted net earnings per share. for the fiscal years ended october 31, 20232022 dollars diluted net earnings per sharedollars diluted net earnings per share dollars in millions gaap net earnings $2,025 $1.54 $868 $0.66 non-gaap adjustments: amortization of initial direct costs— — 4 — amortization of intangible assets288 0.22 293 0.22 impairment of goodwill— — 905 0.69 transformation costs283 0.22 473 0.36 disaster (recovery) charges(12)(0.01)159 0.12 stock-based compensation expense428 0.33 391 0.30 acquisition, disposition and other related charges69 0.05 19 0.01 tax indemnification and other adjustments(55)(0.04)67 0.05 non-service net periodic benefit cost (credit)3 — (134)(0.10) earnings from equity interests(1) 18 0.01 45 0.03 impairment of investment40 0.03 — — adjustments for taxes(255)(0.20)(426)(0.32) non-gaap net earnings $2,832 $2.15 $2,664 $2.02 (1) represents the amortization of basis difference adjustments related to the h3c divestiture. fiscal 2023 included the company's portion of intangible asset impairment charges from h3c of $8 million. reconciliation of net cash provided by operating activities to free cash flow. for the fiscal years ended october 31, 202320222021 in millions net cash provided by operating activities$4,428 $4,593 $5,871 litigation judgment, net of taxes paid— — (2,172) net cash provided by operating activities, excluding litigation judgment, net of taxes paid4,428 4,593 3,699 investment in property, plant and equipment(2,828)(3,122)(2,502) proceeds from sale of property, plant and equipment602 602 354 effect of exchange rate changes on cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash36 (279)— free cash flow$2,238 $1,794 $1,551 56 hewlett packard enterprise company and subsidiaries management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations (continued) use of non-gaap financial measures the non-gaap financial measures presented are net revenue on a constant currency basis (including at the business segment level), non-gaap gross profit, non-gaap gross profit margin, non-gaap earnings from operations, non-gaap tax rate, non-gaap net earnings, non-gaap diluted net earnings per share, and fcf. these non-gaap financial measures are not computed in accordance with, or as an alternative to, generally accepted accounting principles in the united states. the gaap measure most directly comparable to net revenue on a constant currency basis is net revenue. the gaap measure most directly comparable to non-gaap gross profit is gross profit. the gaap measure most directly comparable to non-gaap gross profit margin is gross profit margin. the gaap measure most directly comparable to non-gaap earnings from operations is earnings from operations. the gaap measure most directly comparable to non-gaap operating profit margin (non-gaap earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue) is operating profit margin (earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue). the gaap measure most directly comparable to non-gaap income tax rate is income tax rate. the gaap measure most directly comparable to non-gaap net earnings is net earnings. the gaap measure most directly comparable to non-gaap diluted net earnings per share is diluted net earnings per share. the gaap measure most directly comparable to fcf is cash flow from operations. we believe that providing the non-gaap measures stated above, in addition to the related gaap measures provides greater transparency to the information used in our financial and operational decision making and allows the reader of our condensed consolidated financial statements to see our financial results “through the eyes” of management. we further believe that providing this information provides investors with a supplemental view to understand our historical and prospective operating performance and to evaluate the efficacy of the methodology and information used by management to evaluate and measure such performance. disclosure of these non-gaap financial measures also facilitates comparisons of our operating performance with the performance of other companies in the same industry that supplement their gaap results with non-gaap financial measures that may be calculated in a similar manner. economic substance of non-gaap financial measures net revenue on a constant currency basis assumes no change to the foreign exchange rate utilized in the comparable prior-year period. this measure assists investors with evaluating our past and future performance, without the impact of foreign exchange rates, as more than half of our revenue is generated outside of the u.s. we believe that excluding the items mentioned below from the non-gaap financial measures provides a supplemental view to management and our investors of our consolidated financial performance and presents the financial results of the business without costs that we do not believe to be reflective of our ongoing operating results. exclusion of these items can have a material impact on the equivalent gaap measure and cash flows thus limiting the use of such non-gaap financial measures as analytic tools. see “compensation for limitations with use of non-gaap financial measures” section below for further information. non-gaap gross profit and non-gaap gross profit margin are defined to exclude charges related to the amortization of initial direct costs, stock-based compensation expense, and disaster charges. see below for the reasons management excludes each item: •amortization of initial direct costs represents the portion of lease origination costs incurred in prior fiscal years that do not qualify for capitalization under the new leasing standard. we exclude these costs as we elected the practical expedient under the new leasing standard. as a result, we did not adjust these historical costs to accumulated deficit. we believe that most financing companies did not elect this practical expedient and therefore we exclude these costs. this can have an impact on the equivalent gaap measures and financial services segment results. •stock-based compensation expense consists of equity awards granted based on the estimated fair value of those awards at grant date. although stock-based compensation is a key incentive offered to our employees, we exclude these charges for the purpose of calculating these non-gaap measures, primarily because they are non-cash expenses and our internal benchmarking analyses evidence that many industry participants and peers present non-gaap financial measures excluding stock-based compensation expense. •disaster (recovery) charges are primarily related to the exit of our businesses in russia and belarus, and include credit losses of financing and trade receivables, employee severance and abandoned assets. disaster (recovery) charges also include direct costs or recovery of these costs related to covid-19 as a result of hewlett packard enterprise-hosted, co-hosted, or sponsored event cancellations and subsequent shift to a virtual format. while we present various items as 57 hewlett packard enterprise company and subsidiaries management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations (continued) disaster charges (recovery), we exclude disaster charges (recovery) from these non-gaap measures as the specific charges are non-recurring charges and not indicative of the operational performance of our business. non-gaap earnings from operations and non-gaap operating profit margin consist of earnings from operations or earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue excluding the items mentioned above and charges relating to the amortization of intangible assets, goodwill impairment, transformation costs and acquisition, disposition and other related charges. in addition to the items previously explained above, management excludes these items for the following reasons: •we incur charges relating to the amortization of intangible assets and exclude these charges for purposes of calculating these non-gaap measures. such charges are significantly impacted by the timing and magnitude of our acquisitions. we exclude these charges for the purpose of calculating these non-gaap measures, primarily because they are noncash expenses and our internal benchmarking analyses evidence that many industry participants and peers present non-gaap financial measures excluding intangible asset amortization. although this does not directly affect our cash position, the loss in value of intangible assets over time can have a material impact on the equivalent gaap earnings measure. •in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022, hewlett packard enterprise recorded an impairment charge for the goodwill associated with its hpc & ai and software reporting units following the annual goodwill impairment review. hewlett packard enterprise excludes these charges for purposes of calculating these non-gaap measures to facilitate a more meaningful evaluation of current operating performance and comparisons to operating performance in other periods. •transformation costs represent net costs related to the (i) hpe next plan and (ii) cost optimization and prioritization plan and include restructuring charges, program design and execution costs, costs incurred to transform our it infrastructure, net gains from the sale of real estate and any impairment charges on real estate identified as part of the initiatives. we exclude these costs as they are discrete costs related to two specific transformation programs that were announced in 2017 and 2020, respectively, as multi-year programs necessary to transform the business and it infrastructure following material divestiture transactions in 2017 and in response to covid-19 and an evolving product portfolio in fiscal 2020. the primary elements of the hpe next and the cost optimization and prioritization plan have been substantially completed by october 31, 2023. the exclusion of the transformation program costs from our non-gaap financial measures as stated above is to provide a supplemental measure of our operating results that does not include material hpe next plan and cost optimization and prioritization plan costs as we do not believe such costs to be reflective of our ongoing operating cost structure. further as our transformation costs for these plans have materially fluctuated since 2017, have been materially declining since 2021 and we do not expect to incur material transformation costs related to these programs beyond fiscal 2023, we believe non-gaap measures excluding these costs are useful to management and investors for comparing operating performance across multiple periods. •we incur costs related to our acquisition, disposition and other related charges. the charges are direct expenses, such as professional fees and retention costs, most of which are treated as non-cash or non-capitalized expenses. charges may also include expenses associated with disposal activities including legal and arbitration settlements in connection with certain dispositions. we exclude these costs as these expenses are inconsistent in amount and frequency and are significantly impacted by the timing and nature of our acquisitions and divestitures. in addition, our internal benchmarking analyses evidence that many industry participants and peers present non-gaap financial measures excluding these charges. non-gaap net earnings and non-gaap diluted net earnings per share consist of net earnings or diluted net earnings per share excluding those same charges mentioned above, as well as other items such as tax indemnification and other adjustments, non-service net periodic benefit cost (credit), earnings from equity interests, impairment of investment, and adjustments for taxes. the adjustments for taxes line item includes certain income tax valuation allowances and separation taxes, the impact of tax reform, structural rate adjustment, excess tax benefit from stock-based compensation, and adjustments for additional taxes or tax benefits associated with each non-gaap item. in addition to the items previously explained, management excludes these items for the following reasons: •tax indemnification and other adjustments are primarily related to changes to certain pre-separation and pre-divestiture tax liabilities and tax receivables for which we remain liable on behalf of the separated or divested business, but which may not be subject to indemnification. we exclude these income or charges and the associated tax impact for the purpose of calculating non-gaap measures to facilitate an evaluation of our current operating performance and comparisons to operating performance in prior periods. 58 hewlett packard enterprise company and subsidiaries management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations (continued) •non-service net periodic benefit cost (credit) includes certain market-related factors such as (i) interest cost, (ii) expected return on plan assets, (iii) amortization of prior plan amendments, (iv) amortized actuarial gains or losses, (v) the impacts of any plan settlements/curtailments and (vi) impacts from other market-related factors associated with our defined benefit pension and post-retirement benefit plans. these market-driven retirement-related adjustments are primarily due to the change in pension plan assets and liabilities which are tied to financial market performance. we exclude these adjustments for purposes of calculating non-gaap measures and consider them to be outside the operational performance of the business. •adjustment to earnings from equity interests includes the amortization of the basis difference in relation to the h3c divestiture and the resulting equity method investment in h3c. in the first fiscal quarter of 2023, this adjustment also included our portion of intangible asset impairment charges from h3c. we believe that eliminating this amount for purposes of calculating non-gaap measures facilitates the evaluation of our current operating performance and comparisons to operating performance in prior periods. •in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2023, hpe recorded an impairment charge for an equity investment resulting from a permanent reduction of the investee’s assets. this adjustment was reflected in interest and other, net in the consolidated statements of earnings. we believe eliminating impairment of investment for the purposes of calculating non-gaap measures facilitates the evaluation of our current operating performance and comparisons to operating performance in prior periods. •we utilize a structural long-term projected non-gaap income tax rate in order to provide consistency across the interim reporting periods and to eliminate the effects of items not directly related to our operating structure that can vary in size and frequency. when projecting this long-term rate, we evaluated a three-year financial projection. the projected rate assumes no incremental acquisitions in the three-year projection period and considers other factors including our expected tax structure, our tax positions in various jurisdictions and current impacts from key legislation implemented in major jurisdictions where we operate. for fiscal 2023 and 2022, we used a non-gaap income tax rate of 14%. the non-gaap income tax rate could be subject to change for a variety of reasons, including the rapidly evolving global tax environment, significant changes in our geographic earnings mix including due to acquisition activity, or other changes to our strategy or business operations. we will re-evaluate its long-term rate as appropriate. we believe that making these adjustments for purposes of calculating non-gaap measures, facilitates a supplemental evaluation of our current operating performance and comparisons to past operating results. fcf is a non-gaap measure that is defined as cash flow from operations, excluding the impact of proceeds received in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021 from a one-time itanium litigation judgment, less net capital expenditures (investments in pp&e less proceeds from the sale of pp&e), and adjusted for the effect of exchange rate fluctuations on cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash. fcf does not represent the total increase or decrease in cash for the period. our management and investors can use fcf for the purpose of determining the amount of cash available for investment in our businesses, repurchasing stock and other purposes as well as evaluating our historical and prospective liquidity. compensation for limitations with use of non-gaap financial measures these non-gaap financial measures have limitations as analytical tools, and these measures should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under gaap. some of the limitations in relying on these non- gaap financial measures are that they can have a material impact on the equivalent gaap earnings measures and cash flows, they may be calculated differently by other companies (limiting the usefulness of those measures for comparative purposes) and may not reflect the full economic effect of the loss in value of certain assets. we compensate for these limitations on the use of non-gaap financial measures by relying primarily on our gaap results and using non-gaap financial measures only as a supplement. we also provide a reconciliation of each non-gaap financial measure to its most directly comparable gaap financial measure for this fiscal year and prior periods, and we encourage investors to review those reconciliations carefully.