table of content item 7. management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations understanding our financial information the following discussion and analysis provides information management believes to be relevant to understanding the financial condition and results of operations of the company. the discussion focuses on our financial results for the fiscal year ended april 25, 2025 (fiscal year 2025) and the fiscal year ended april 26, 2024 (fiscal year 2024). a discussion on our results of operations for fiscal year 2024 as compared to the year ended april 28, 2023 (fiscal year 2023) is included in part ii, item 7. "management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations" of our annual report on form 10-k for the year ended april 26, 2024, filed with the sec on june 20, 2024, and is incorporated by reference into this form 10-k. you should read this discussion and analysis along with our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto at april 25, 2025 and april 26, 2024 and for fiscal years 2025, 2024, and 2023, which are presented within "item 8. financial statements and supplementary data" in this annual report on form 10-k. amounts reported in millions within this annual report are computed based on the amounts in thousands, and therefore, the sum of the components may not equal the total amount reported in millions due to rounding. additionally, certain columns and rows within tables may not sum due to rounding. financial trends throughout this management’s discussion and analysis, we present certain financial measures that facilitate management's review of the operational performance of the company and as a basis for strategic planning; however, such financial measures are not presented in our financial statements prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the united states (u.s.) (u.s. gaap). these financial measures are considered "non-gaap financial measures" and are intended to supplement, and should not be considered as superior to, financial measures presented in accordance with u.s. gaap. we believe that non-gaap financial measures provide information useful to investors in understanding the company's underlying operational performance and trends and may facilitate comparisons with the performance of other companies in the medical technologies industry. as presented in the gaap to non-gaap reconciliations section on the following pages, our non-gaap financial measures exclude the impact of amortization of intangible assets and certain charges or benefits that contribute to or reduce earnings and that may affect financial trends and include certain charges or benefits that result from transactions or events that we believe may or may not recur with similar materiality or impact to our operations in future periods (non-gaap adjustments). in the event there is a non-gaap adjustment recognized in our operating results, the tax cost or benefit attributable to that item is separately calculated and reported. because the effective rate can be significantly impacted by the non-gaap adjustments that take place during the period, we often refer to our tax rate using both the effective rate and the non-gaap nominal tax rate (non-gaap nominal tax rate). the non-gaap nominal tax rate is calculated as the income tax provision, adjusted for the impact of non-gaap adjustments, as a percentage of income before income taxes, excluding non-gaap adjustments. free cash flow is a non-gaap financial measure calculated by subtracting property, plant, and equipment additions from operating cash flows. refer to the “gaap to non-gaap reconciliations," "income taxes," and "free cash flow" sections for reconciliations of the non-gaap financial measures to their most directly comparable financial measures prepared in accordance with u.s. gaap. 29 table of content executive level overview the following is a summary of revenue, diluted earnings per share, and operating cash flow for fiscal years 2025 and 2024: gaap to non-gaap reconciliations the tables below present reconciliations of our non-gaap financial measures to the most directly comparable financial measures prepared in accordance with u.s. gaap for fiscal years 2025 and 2024. fiscal year ended april 25, 2025 (in millions, except per share data)income before income taxesincome tax provision (benefit)net income attributable to medtronicdiluted epseffective tax rate gaap$5,628 $936 $4,662 $3.61 16.6 % non-gaap adjustments: amortization of intangible assets (1) 1,807 335 1,471 1.14 18.5 restructuring and associated costs (2) 303 65 238 0.18 21.5 acquisition and divestiture-related items (3) 124 23 101 0.08 18.5 certain litigation charges, net317 68 249 0.19 21.5 (gain)/loss on minority investments (4) 213 26 185 0.14 12.2 medical device regulations (5) 52 10 42 0.03 19.2 other (6) 90 20 70 0.05 22.2 certain tax adjustments, net (7) — (62)62 0.05 — non-gaap$8,533 $1,423 $7,079 $5.49 16.7 % 30 fiscal year ended april 26, 2024 (in millions, except per share data)income before income taxesincome tax provision (benefit)net income attributable to medtronicdiluted epseffective tax rate gaap$4,837 $1,133 $3,676 $2.76 23.4 % non-gaap adjustments: amortization of intangible assets1,693 258 1,435 1.08 15.2 restructuring and associated costs (2) 389 66 323 0.24 17.0 acquisition and divestiture-related items (8) 777 113 664 0.50 14.5 certain litigation charges, net149 31 118 0.09 20.8 (gain)/loss on minority investments (4) 308 2 305 0.23 0.6 medical device regulations (5) 119 22 97 0.07 18.5 certain tax adjustments, net (9) — (299)299 0.22 — non-gaap$8,273 $1,327 $6,918 $5.20 16.0 % (1)the company recognized $151 million of accelerated amortization on certain intangible assets related to product line exits within the cardiovascular portfolio. (2)associated costs primarily include salaries and wages for employees supporting the restructuring activities, consulting expenses, asset write-offs, and for the fiscal year ended april 25, 2025, contract terminations. (3)the charges primarily include exit of business-related charges, changes in fair value of contingent consideration, business combination costs, and gains related to certain business or asset sales. (4)we exclude unrealized and realized gains and losses on our minority investments as we do not believe that these components of income or expense have a direct correlation to our ongoing or future business operations. (5)the charges represent incremental costs of complying with the new european union medical device regulations for previously registered products and primarily include charges for contractors supporting the project and other direct third-party expenses. we consider these costs to be duplicative of previously incurred costs and/or one-time costs, which are limited to a specific time period. (6)reflects the recognition of incremental italian payback accruals resulting from the two july 22, 2024 rulings by the constitutional court of italy relating to certain prior years since 2015. (7)primarily relates to amortization of previously established deferred tax assets from intercompany intellectual property transactions. (8)the charges predominantly include $439 million of charges related to the february 2024 decision to exit the company's ventilator product line, which primarily includes long-lived intangible asset impairments and inventory write-downs. in addition, other charges primarily consist of changes in fair value of contingent consideration and associated costs related to the previously contemplated separation of the patient monitoring and respiratory interventions businesses. (9)the net charge primarily relates to an income tax reserve adjustment associated with the june 2023, israeli central-lod district court decision and the establishment of a valuation allowance against certain net operating losses which were partially offset by a benefit from the change in a swiss cantonal tax rate associated with previously established deferred tax assets from intercompany intellectual property transactions and the step up in tax basis for swiss cantonal purposes. free cash flow free cash flow, a non-gaap financial measure, is calculated by subtracting additions to property, plant, and equipment from net cash provided by operating activities. management uses this non-gaap financial measure, in addition to u.s. gaap financial measures, to evaluate our operating results. free cash flow should be considered supplemental to, and not a substitute for, our reported financial results prepared in accordance with u.s. gaap. reconciliations between net cash provided by operating activities (the most comparable u.s. gaap measure) and free cash flow are as follows: fiscal year (in millions)20252024 net cash provided by operating activities$7,044 $6,787 additions to property, plant, and equipment(1,859)(1,587) free cash flow$5,185 $5,200 refer to the summary of cash flows section for drivers of the change in cash provided by operating activities. 31 macroeconomic trends looking ahead, a number of macroeconomic and geopolitical factors could negatively impact our business, including without limitation: •competitive product launches and pricing pressure, geographic macroeconomic developments including changes in global trade policies and fluctuations in currency exchange rates, general price inflation, changes in interest rates, reimbursement challenges, impacts from changes in the mix of our product offerings, delays in product registration approvals, national and provincial tender pricing for certain products, particularly in china, replacement cycle challenges, and supply chain challenges from time to time. •recent developments in global trade policy have introduced new uncertainties for our business. during and subsequent to the reporting period, the u.s., china, and other jurisdictions imposed or proposed additional tariffs on imported goods. based on current imposed or proposed rates as of may 21, 2025, we estimate the net tariff impact to be $200 million to $350 million in fiscal year 2026, with the majority recognized in the consolidated statements of income in the second half of the fiscal year. the lower end of the range assumes that the current u.s. (30%) and china (10%) tariffs persist, while the higher end of the range assumes tariffs revert to higher rates (u.s. 145%, china 125%) after the 90-day pause. the actual amount could vary based on changes in tariff rates, duration of tariffs, scope of tariffs, and potential countermeasures or mitigation actions. the impact of the tariffs on the financial results for fiscal year 2025 were not material. while we are taking proactive steps to mitigate the effects of these tariffs, the evolving nature of international trade policy continues to present a risk to our cost structure and financial performance. further escalation or expansion of trade barriers could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations. •the sanctions and other measures being imposed in response to the russia-ukraine conflict are having and could continue to have impacts on revenue and supply chain. the financial impact of the conflict in fiscal year 2025, including on accounts receivable and inventory reserves, was not material. for fiscal year 2025, the business of the company in these countries represented less than 1% of the company's consolidated revenues and assets. •although the long-term implications of israel's conflict are difficult to predict at this time, the financial and operational impact of the conflict in fiscal year 2025, including on accounts receivable and inventory reserves, was not material. as of april 25, 2025, the company had 6 facilities and approximately 1,500 employees in israel. for fiscal year 2025, the business of the company in israel represented less than 1% of the company's consolidated revenues and assets. net sales starting in the first quarter of fiscal year 2025, the company combined the non-u.s. developed markets and the emerging markets into an international market geography. prior period net sales have been recast to conform to the new presentation. the charts below illustrate the percent of net sales by segment for fiscal years 2025 and 2024: 32 the table below includes net sales by segment and division and market geography for fiscal years 2025 and 2024: net sales by fiscal yearpercent change (in millions)20252024 cardiac rhythm & heart failure$6,392 $5,995 7 % structural heart & aortic 3,554 3,358 6 coronary & peripheral vascular 2,535 2,478 2 cardiovascular 12,481 11,831 5 cranial & spinal technologies4,973 4,756 5 specialty therapies2,940 2,905 1 neuromodulation1,932 1,746 11 neuroscience9,846 9,406 5 surgical & endoscopy6,498 6,508 — acute care & monitoring1,909 1,908 — medical surgical 8,407 8,417 — diabetes 2,755 2,488 11 reportable segment net sales33,489 32,142 4 other operating segment(1) 137 221 (38) other adjustments(2) (90)— 100 total net sales$33,537 $32,364 4 % u.s.international (in millions)fiscal year 2025 fiscal year 2024 % changefiscal year 2025 fiscal year 2024 % change cardiovascular$5,804 $5,597 4 %$6,677 $6,234 7 % neuroscience6,713 6,305 6 3,133 3,101 1 medical surgical3,664 3,717 (1)4,744 4,700 1 diabetes923 852 8 1,832 1,636 12 reportable segment net sales17,104 16,471 4 16,386 15,671 5 other operating segment(1) 68 91 (25)70 131 (47) other adjustments(2) — — — (90)— 100 total net sales$17,171 $16,562 4 %$16,365 $15,802 4 % (1)includes operations and ongoing transition agreements from businesses the company has exited or divested. (2)incremental italian payback accruals resulting from the two july 22, 2024 rulings by the constitutional court of italy relating to certain prior years since 2015. the increase in net sales for fiscal year 2025 was driven by growth in most businesses, including strong growth in cardiac ablation solutions, cardiac pacing therapies, tavr, diabetes, neuromodulation, spine, and advanced energy. the net sales increase was partially offset by declines in stapling and a $90 million incremental italian payback accrual resulting from the two july 22, 2024 rulings by the constitutional court of italy relating to certain prior years since 2015. cardiovascular cardiovascular products include pacemakers, insertable cardiac monitors, cardiac resynchronization therapy devices, implantable cardioverter defibrillators, leads and delivery systems, products for the treatment of atrial fibrillation, information systems for the management of patients with cardiac rhythm & heart failure devices, products designed to reduce surgical site infections, coronary and peripheral stents and related delivery systems, balloons and related delivery systems, endovascular stent graft systems, heart valve replacement technologies, cardiac tissue ablation systems, open heart and coronary bypass grafting surgical products, and renal denervation systems for the treatment of hypertension. cardiovascular also includes care management services and cath lab managed services (clms) within the cardiac rhythm & heart failure division. cardiovascular's net sales for fiscal year 2025 were $12.5 billion, an increase of 5 percent as compared to fiscal year 2024. the net sales increase was primarily due to the strong performance of cardiac ablation solutions, cardiac rhythm management, structural heart, and cardiac surgery. 33 the charts below illustrate the percent of cardiovascular net sales by division for fiscal years 2025 and 2024: cardiac rhythm & heart failure (crhf) net sales increased 7 percent in fiscal year 2025 as compared to fiscal year 2024. the net sales increase was driven by growth in micra transcatheter pacing systems, aurora extravascular implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ev-icd) system, and tyrx, partially offset by declines in crt-ds. cardiac ablation solutions experienced strong growth in pulseselect and affera sphere-9 pulsed field ablation with partially offsetting declines in cryoablation. structural heart & aortic (sha) net sales increased 6 percent in fiscal year 2025 as compared to fiscal year 2024. the net sales increase was driven by continued growth in structural heart from adoption of evolut fx+ tavr system and in cardiac surgery driven by growth in perfusion and surgical valves. coronary & peripheral vascular (cpv) net sales increased 2 percent in fiscal year 2025 as compared to fiscal year 2024. the net sales increase was driven by growth in coronary and renal denervation led by guide catheters, balloons, and the symplicity spyral renal denervation system, partially offset by a decline in stents and impacts from tender pricing in china in peripheral vascular health. in addition to the macro-economic and geopolitical factors described in the executive level overview section, looking ahead, we expect cardiovascular could be affected by the following: •continued global penetration of our micra transcatheter pacing portfolio. •continued acceptance and growth from the azure xt and azure s surescan pacing systems and the 3830 lead. •global adoption of aurora ev-icd. •growth of the cobalt and crome portfolio of icds and crt-ds. •growth of the crt-p quadripolar pacing system. •continued growth, adoption, and utilization of the tyrx envelope for implantable devices. •continued use and acceptance of reveal linq and expansion of the linq ii cardiac monitor. •continued acceptance, adoption, and growth of our innovative portfolio of products in the electrophysiology (ep) segment, including the pulseselect pulsed field ablation system and the affera mapping and ablation system with sphere-9 catheter. the affera mapping and ablation system and sphere-9 catheter received u.s. fda approval in late october 2024. •continued acceptance and growth of the self-expanding corevalve evolut transcatheter aortic valve replacement platform. this includes evolut pro which provides enhanced hemodynamics, reliable delivery, enhanced durability, advanced sealing, and evolut fx, a system designed to improve the overall procedural experience through enhancements in deliverability, implant 34 visibility, and deployment stability. the evolut fx+ tavr system maintains the valve performance benefits of the legacy evolut tavr platform and is designed to facilitate coronary access. the system was approved by the u.s. fda in march 2024 and received ce mark in late october 2024. •market acceptance and reimbursement for the symplicity spyral renal denervation system, also known as the symplicity blood pressure procedure, for the treatment of hypertension. •continued acceptance and growth of the onyx frontier drug-eluting stent (des) platform. onyx frontier is a des that introduces an enhanced delivery system and is used for complex percutaneous coronary intervention (pci). •acceptance and growth of in.pact 018 drug-coated balloons (dcb). in.pact 018 adds to the existing in.pact admiral dcb portfolio and is used to treat femoropopliteal disease. •our ability to meet growing demand for our existing products and to successfully develop, obtain regulatory approval of, and commercialize the products within our pipeline. neuroscience neuroscience's products include various spinal implants, bone graft substitutes, biologic products, image-guided surgery and intra-operative imaging systems, robotic guidance systems used in the robot-assisted spine procedures, and systems that incorporate advanced energy surgical instruments. neuroscience's products also focus on therapies to treat the diseases of the vasculature in and around the brain, including coils, neurovascular stents, and flow diversion products, as well as products to treat ear, nose, and throat (ent), and the treatment of overactive bladder and urinary retention. neuroscience also manufactures products related to implantable neurostimulation therapies and drug delivery systems for the treatment of chronic pain, movement disorders, and epilepsy. neuroscience’s net sales for fiscal year 2025 were $9.8 billion, an increase of 5 percent as compared to fiscal year 2024. the net sales increase was primarily due to growth in neuromodulation, spine and biologics, and neurosurgery. the charts below illustrate the percent of neuroscience net sales by division for fiscal years 2025 and 2024: cranial & spinal technologies (cst) net sales for fiscal year 2025 increased 5 percent as compared to fiscal year 2024. the net sales increase was driven by the continued adoption of the aible ecosystem of spine implants and enabling technology with growth in core spine, biologics, and neurosurgery. specialty therapies (specialty) net sales for fiscal year 2025 increased 1 percent as compared to fiscal year 2024. the net sales increase was driven by growth on continued adoption of the interstim x system and ent, partially offset by impacts from tender pricing in china in neurovascular. 35 neuromodulation (nm) net sales for fiscal year 2025 increased 11 percent as compared to fiscal year 2024. the net sales increase was driven by growth in pain stimulation due to the continued launch of the inceptiv closed-loop spinal cord stimulator, brain modulation driven by the percept rc deep brain neurostimulator, and interventional. in addition to the macro-economic and geopolitical factors described in the executive level overview section, looking ahead we expect neuroscience could be affected by the following: •continued adoption and growth of our integrated solutions through the aible offering, which integrates spinal implants with enabling technologies (stealthstation, o-arm imaging systems, and midas), mazor robotics, and unid adaptive spine intelligence ai-driven technology for surgical planning and personalized spinal implants. •market acceptance and continued global adoption of innovative new spine products and procedural solutions within our cst operating unit, such as catalyft pl, modulex, cd horizon voyager system, and our infinity oct system, as well as continued growth from titan spine titanium interbody implants with nanolock technology. •continued growth of commercially available pipeline embolization devices, endovascular treatments for large or giant wide-necked brain aneurysms. •continued acceptance and growth of the solitaire x revascularization device for treatment of acute ischemic stroke and our react catheter and riptide aspiration system. •continued acceptance and growth of our pelvic health therapies, including our interstim therapy with interstim x and interstim ii recharge-free neurostimulators and interstim micro rechargeable neurostimulator for patients suffering from overactive bladder, (non-obtrusive) urinary retention, and chronic fecal incontinence. •continued acceptance and growth of our ent therapies, including capital equipment sales of the stealthstation ent surgical navigation system and intraoperative nim nerve monitoring system, and the propel sinus implants used in the treatment of chronic rhinosinusitis. •continued acceptance and growth from spinal cord stimulation (scs) therapy for treating chronic pain and diabetic peripheral neuropathy (dpn) on the inceptiv closed-loop rechargeable neurostimulator, intellis rechargeable neurostimulator and vanta recharge-free neurostimulator. the inceptiv closed-loop rechargeable scs received u.s. fda approval in april 2024. •continued acceptance and growth of our percept family of deep brain stimulation (dbs) devices with proprietary brainsense technology for objectifying and personalizing the treatment of parkinson's disease, epilepsy, and other movement disorders. in august 2024, the u.s. fda approved asleep dbs surgery for people with parkinson's and people with essential tremor. brainsense adaptive dbs and brainsense electrode identifier received ce mark in january 2025 and u.s. fda approval in february 2025. •our ability to meet growing demand for our existing products and to successfully develop, obtain regulatory approval of, and commercialize the products within our pipeline, which include the hemorrhagic stroke intravascular device, our next-generation spine enabling technologies, and the percutaneous tibial neuromodulation system. medical surgical medical surgical’s products span the entire continuum of patient care from diagnosis to recovery, with a focus on diseases of the gastrointestinal tract, lungs, pelvic region, obesity, and preventable complications. the products include those for advanced and general surgical products, surgical stapling devices, vessel sealing instruments, wound closure, electrosurgery products, hernia mechanical devices, mesh implants, advanced ablation, interventional lung, airway products, and sensors and monitors for pulse oximetry, capnography, level of consciousness and cerebral oximetry. medical surgical’s net sales for fiscal year 2025 were $8.4 billion, flat as compared to fiscal year 2024, with performance outlined below. 36 the charts below illustrate the percent of medical surgical net sales by division for fiscal years 2025 and 2024: surgical & endoscopy (se) net sales for fiscal year 2025 were flat as compared to fiscal year 2024. net sales were impacted by declines in stapling, due to u.s. bariatric segment declines and continued shifts to robotic surgery, and endoscopy. partially offsetting these declines was strong growth in advanced energy, due to continued adoption of ligasure vessel sealing technology. acute care & monitoring (acm) net sales for fiscal year 2025 were flat as compared to fiscal year 2024. net sales were impacted by growth of the bis advance monitoring system offset by declines in medtronic care management services. in addition to the macro-economic and geopolitical factors described in the executive level overview section, looking ahead we expect medical surgical could be affected by the following: •acceptance and continued growth of open-to-mis (minimally invasive surgery) techniques and tools through our efforts to transition open surgery to mis. open-to-mis initiative focuses on capturing the market opportunity that exists in transitioning open procedures to mis, whether through traditional mis, advanced instrumentation, or robotics. through our approach, in parallel, we also expand our presence and optimize open surgery in current open surgery markets. •continued global acceptance and future growth of powered stapling and energy platform. •our ability to execute ongoing strategies addressing the pressures to bariatric surgery procedure volumes in the u.s. from pharmaceuticals, and growth of surgical soft tissue robotics procedures in the u.s. •our ability to create markets and drive products and procedures into emerging markets with our high quality and cost-effective surgical products designed for customers in emerging markets. •continued acceptance and growth in patient monitoring and airway management. key products in this area include microstream capnography, nellcor pulse oximetry system with oximax technology, shiley tracheostomy and endotracheal tubes, and mcgrath mac video laryngoscopes. •acceptance of less invasive standards of care in chronic and colorectal, as well as hepatology products, including products that span the care continuum from diagnostics to therapeutics. •expanding the use of less invasive treatments and furthering our commitment to improving options for women with abnormal uterine bleeding. our expanded and strengthened surgical offerings complement our global gynecology business. •global adoption of robotic-assisted surgery and the safe and effective use of the hugo robotic assisted surgery (ras) system, including system reliability and acceptability, for urologic, bariatric, gynecologic, hernia, and general surgery procedures. this 37 includes continued integration and adoption of touch surgery enterprise with the first artificial intelligence powered surgical videos and analytics platform to make it easier to train and discover new techniques within the robotics platform. the hugo ras system, which received ce mark in october 2021, as well as secured additional regulatory approvals outside the u.s., is designed to help reduce unwanted variability, improve patient outcomes, and, by extension, lower per procedure cost. •our ability to meet growing demand for our existing products and to successfully develop, obtain regulatory approval of, and commercialize the products within our pipeline, which include our hugo ras system in the u.s., the adoption of ai in endoscopy and digital surgical technologies, signia powered stapling devices, and our next-gen ligasure and sonicision vessel sealing devices. diabetes diabetes' products include insulin pumps, continuous glucose monitoring (cgm) systems, and consumables. diabetes' net sales for fiscal year 2025 were $2.8 billion, an increase of 11 percent as compared to fiscal year 2024. the increase in net sales was primarily driven by strong u.s growth as a result of the continued adoption of the minimed 780g automated insulated delivery (aid) system, and strong international growth in cgm systems from increased attachment rates and adoption of simplera sync. in addition to the macro-economic and geopolitical factors described in the executive level overview section, looking ahead we expect diabetes could be affected by the following: •the pending separation of the diabetes business from the company. in may 2025, the company announced its intent to separate the diabetes operating unit into a new standalone company, and its expectation to complete the separation within 18 months from the announcement date. •continued acceptance and growth for the minimed 780g insulin pump system, which is powered by smartguard technology and features the added benefits of meal detection technology that automatically adjusts and corrects sugar levels every five minutes. the global adoption of our aid systems has resulted in strong sensor attachment rates. the minimed 780g insulin pump system with the guardian 4 sensor is available in the u.s., and the minimed 780g insulin pump system with simplera sync received u.s. fda approval in april 2025 and ce mark in early january 2024. •market acceptance and growth of our sensor simplera, which received u.s fda approval in august 2024 and ce mark in september 2023. •continued acceptance and growth of the guardian connect cgm system, which displays glucose information directly to a smartphone to provide patients access to their glucose levels seamlessly and discretely. the guardian connect cgm system is available on both apple ios and android devices. •market acceptance and growth of our inpen smart pen system, which allows users to have their medtronic cgm readings in real-time alongside insulin dose information, all in one view. •continued pump, cgm, and consumable competition in an expanding global market. •changes in medical reimbursement policies and programs, along with additional payor coverage on insulin pumps. •our ability to meet growing demand for our existing products and to successfully develop, obtain regulatory approval, manufacture and commercialize the products within our pipeline, including our partnership with abbott to expand cgm options for people living with diabetes, our next generation insulin delivery options, as well as expanded labeling in type 2 diabetes, and fast acting insulins. 38 costs and expenses the following is a summary of cost of products sold, research and development, and selling, general, and administrative expenses as a percent of net sales: cost of products sold cost of products sold for fiscal year 2025 was $11.6 billion as compared to $11.2 billion for fiscal year 2024. cost of products sold as a percentage of net sales was flat as compared to the prior fiscal year. cost of products sold increased primarily driven by increases in net sales and unfavorable currency impact partially offset by lower costs for quality remediation and excess and obsolete inventory charges. fiscal year 2024 included $70 million of inventory write-downs associated with our february 2024 decision to exit our ventilator product line. for additional information about the ventilator inventory write-down, refer to note 3 of the consolidated financial statements in "item 8. financial statements and supplementary data" in this annual report on form 10-k. looking ahead, we anticipate incurring additional costs related to current imposed and proposed tariffs. refer to the executive level overview section for further information. research and development expense we remain committed to deliver the best possible experiences for patients, physicians, and caregivers we serve; to create technologies that expand what’s possible across the human body to transform lives; to turn data and insights into real action to serve patient needs, improving care; and to expand healthcare access and deliver positive outcomes. research and development expense for fiscal years 2025 and 2024 was $2.7 billion. selling, general, and administrative expense our goal is to continue to leverage selling, general, and administrative expense management initiatives. selling, general, and administrative expense primarily consists of salaries and wages, other administrative costs, such as professional fees and marketing expenses, certain acquisition and divestiture-related costs, and restructuring associated expenses. selling, general, and administrative expense for fiscal year 2025 was $10.8 billion as compared to $10.7 billion for fiscal year 2024. the increase in selling, general, and administrative expense is primarily due to new product launches and commercialization activities. the following is a summary of other costs and expenses (income): fiscal year (in millions)20252024 amortization of intangible assets$1,807 $1,693 restructuring charges, net267 226 certain litigation charges, net317 149 other operating (income) expense, net(23)464 other non-operating income, net(402)(412) interest expense, net729 719 amortization of intangible assets amortization of intangible assets includes the amortization expense of our definite-lived intangible assets, consisting of customer relationships, purchased technology and patents, trademarks, tradenames, and other intangible assets. 39 amortization of intangible assets for fiscal year 2025 includes $151 million of accelerated amortization on certain intangible assets related to product line exits within the cardiovascular portfolio. restructuring charges, net in fiscal years 2025 and 2024, restructuring costs primarily related to cost reduction initiatives, which predominantly included employee termination benefits, facility consolidations, and asset write-downs, and specifically for fiscal year 2025, contract terminations. for additional information about our restructuring programs, refer to note 4 of the consolidated financial statements in "item 8. financial statements and supplementary data" in this annual report on form 10-k. certain litigation charges, net we classify specified certain litigation charges and gains related to significant legal matters as certain litigation charges, net in the consolidated statements of income. for additional information, refer to note 18 of the consolidated financial statements in “item 8. financial statements and supplementary data” in this annual report on form 10-k. other operating (income) expense, net other operating (income) expense, net primarily includes expenses associated with royalties paid for the in-license of intellectual property from third parties, currency remeasurement and derivative gains and losses, changes in the fair value of contingent consideration, certain acquisition and divestiture-related items, and income from funded research and development arrangements. for fiscal year 2025, the change in other operating (income) expense, net was largely driven by a decrease in acquisition and divestiture-related expenses as well as insignificant gains from certain business or asset sales in the cardiovascular and neuroscience portfolios during fiscal year 2025. in fiscal year 2024, acquisition and divestiture-related expenses included $369 million of charges related to the company's decision to exit the ventilator product line, which primarily included intangible asset impairments of $295 million and other charges for contract cancellation costs and severance. in addition, the change in fair value of contingent consideration for fiscal year 2025 was $42 million of expense as compared to $156 million of expense for fiscal year 2024. the change in other operating (income) expense, net was partially offset by the net impact of currency remeasurement and our hedging programs. the currency impact for fiscal year 2025 was a net loss of $3 million as compared to a net gain of $68 million in fiscal year 2024. additional information on the charges associated with the ventilator product line exit is described in note 3 of the consolidated financial statements in "item 8. financial statements and supplementary data" in this annual report on form 10-k. other non-operating income, net other non-operating income, net includes the non-service component of net periodic pension and postretirement benefit cost, investment gains and losses, and interest income, which includes income on marketable debt securities and our global liquidity structures. interest income was $511 million and $597 million for fiscal year 2025 and 2024, respectively. income from the non-service component of net periodic pension and postretirement benefit cost was $107 million and $124 million for fiscal year 2025 and 2024, respectively. net losses on minority investments were $213 million and $308 million for fiscal year 2025 and 2024, respectively. interest expense, net interest expense, net includes interest incurred on our outstanding borrowings, global liquidity structures, amortization of debt issuance costs and debt premiums or discounts, and amortization of amounts excluded from the effectiveness assessment of certain net investment and fair value hedges. the increase in interest expense, net was primarily driven by the €3.0 billion debt issuance in june 2024, partially offset by lower borrowing balances in our global liquidity structures. 40 income taxes fiscal year (in millions)20252024 income tax provision$936 $1,133 income before income taxes5,628 4,837 effective tax rate16.6 %23.4 % non-gaap income tax provision$1,423 $1,327 non-gaap income before income taxes8,533 8,273 non-gaap nominal tax rate16.7 %16.0 % difference between the effective tax rate and non-gaap nominal tax rate0.1 %(7.4)% the organization for economic co-operation and development (oecd) published pillar two model rules defining the global minimum tax, which calls for the taxation of large multinational corporations at a minimum rate of 15% in each jurisdiction in which the group operates. the oecd has since issued administrative guidance providing transition and safe harbor rules around the implementation of the pillar two model rules. a number of countries, including ireland, have enacted legislation to implement the core elements of pillar two model rules, which were effective for medtronic in fiscal year 2025. the israeli central-lod district court issued its decision in medtronic ventor technologies ltd (ventor) v. kfar saba assessing office in june 2023. the court determined that there was a deemed taxable transfer of intellectual property. as a result, the company recorded a $187 million income tax charge during fiscal year 2024 and filed an appeal with the supreme court of israel. our effective tax rate for fiscal year 2025 was 16.6 percent, as compared to 23.4 percent in fiscal year 2024. the decrease in our effective tax rate was primarily attributable to the establishment of a valuation allowance on certain net operating losses and an income tax reserve adjustment made in fiscal year 2024 associated with the ventor court decision noted above, which was partially offset by the swiss cantonal tax rate change on previously recorded deferred tax assets in fiscal year 2024 and the implementation of the pillar two model rules noted above in fiscal year 2025. our non-gaap nominal tax rate for fiscal year 2025 was 16.7 percent, as compared to 16.0 percent in fiscal year 2024. the change in our non-gaap nominal tax rate was primarily due to the implementation of the pillar two model rules and year-over-year changes in operational results by jurisdiction. during fiscal years 2025 and 2024, operational tax costs were not significant. an increase in our non-gaap nominal tax rate of one percent would result in an additional income tax provision for fiscal years 2025 and 2024 of approximately $85 million and $83 million, respectively. certain tax adjustments during fiscal year 2025, the cost from certain tax adjustments of $62 million, recognized in income tax provision in the consolidated statements of income, included amortization of the previously established deferred tax assets from intercompany intellectual property transactions. during fiscal year 2024, the net cost from certain tax adjustments of $299 million, recognized in income tax provision in the consolidated statements of income, included the following: •a cost of $187 million associated with a reserve adjustment related to the israeli central-lod district court decision with respect to a deemed taxable transfer of intellectual property. •a cost of $124 million related to a change in valuation allowance on previously recorded net operating losses. •a benefit of $95 million related to a swiss cantonal tax rate change on previously recorded deferred tax assets. •a cost of $50 million associated with the amortization of the previously established deferred tax assets from intercompany intellectual property transactions. •a cost of $33 million associated with a change in the company’s permanent reinvestment assertion on certain historical earnings. 41 certain tax adjustments will affect the comparability of our operating results between periods. therefore, we consider these non-gaap adjustments. refer to the "executive level overview" section of this management's discussion and analysis for further discussion of these adjustments. liquidity and capital resources we are currently in a strong financial position, and we believe our balance sheet and liquidity as of april 25, 2025 provide us with flexibility, and our cash, cash equivalents, and current investments, along with our credit facility and related commercial paper programs will satisfy our foreseeable operating needs. our liquidity and capital structure are evaluated regularly within the context of our annual operating and strategic planning processes. we consider the liquidity necessary to fund our operations, which includes working capital needs, investments in research and development, property, plant, and equipment, and other operating costs. we also consider capital allocation alternatives that balance returning value to shareholders through dividends and share repurchases, satisfying maturing debt, and acquiring businesses and technology. summary of cash flows the following is a summary of cash provided by (used in) operating, investing, and financing activities, the effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents, and the net change in cash and cash equivalents: fiscal year (in millions)20252024 cash provided by (used in): operating activities$7,044 $6,787 investing activities(1,937)(2,366) financing activities(4,361)(4,450) effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents188 (230) net change in cash and cash equivalents$934 $(259) operating activities the $257 million increase in net cash provided was primarily driven by an increase in cash collected from customers due to an increase in sales, partially offset by an increase in cash paid to vendors, annual incentive payouts, and cash paid for taxes. investing activities the $429 million decrease in net cash used was primarily attributable to an increase in net sales and maturities of investments of $576 million and decrease in cash paid for acquisitions of $113 million, partially offset by an increase in net additions to property, plant, and equipment of $272 million. for more information on the acquisitions, refer to note 3 of the consolidated financial statements in “item 8. financial statements and supplementary data” in this annual report on form 10-k. financing activities there was an $89 million decrease in net cash used compared to the prior fiscal year. in the current period, there was a decrease in total short-term borrowings of $1.1 billion, compared to an increase of $1.1 billion in the prior year. additionally, in june 2024, medtronic inc. issued four tranches of eur-denominated senior notes with an aggregate principal of €3.0 billion, or $3.2 billion, which was partially offset by an $873 million increase in net share repurchases during fiscal year 2025. for more information on senior notes issued, refer to the debt and capital section below. debt and capital our capital structure consists of equity and interest-bearing debt. we primarily utilize unsecured senior debt obligations to meet our financing needs and, to a lesser extent, bank borrowings. from time to time, we may repurchase our outstanding debt obligations in the open market or through privately negotiated transactions. total debt at april 25, 2025 was $28.5 billion, as compared to $25.0 billion at april 26, 2024. the increase in total debt was primarily driven by issuance of euro-denominated senior notes and fluctuations in exchange rates. in june 2024, medtronic inc. issued four tranches of eur-denominated senior notes with an aggregate principal of €3.0 billion, with maturities ranging from fiscal year 2030 to 2054, resulting in cash proceeds of approximately $3.2 billion, net of discounts and issuance costs. in anticipation of the euro-denominated debt issuance, the company entered into forward currency exchange rate contracts to manage the exposure to exchange rate movements. these contracts were settled in conjunction with the issuance of the june 2024 notes. 42 we repurchase our ordinary shares on occasion as part of our focus on returning value to our shareholders. in march 2019, the company's board of directors authorized $6.0 billion for repurchase of the company's ordinary shares. in march 2024, the company's board of directors authorized an additional $5.0 billion for repurchase of the company's ordinary shares. there is no specific time period associated with these repurchase authorizations. during fiscal years 2025 and 2024, the company repurchased a total of 38 million and 25 million shares, respectively, under this program at an average price of $83.36 and $83.04, respectively. at april 25, 2025, we had approximately $2.1 billion remaining under the share repurchase program authorized by our board of directors. for more information on credit arrangements, refer to note 6 of the consolidated financial statements in “item 8. financial statements and supplementary data” in this annual report on form 10-k. liquidity our liquidity sources at april 25, 2025 included $2.2 billion of cash and cash equivalents and $6.7 billion of current investments. additionally, we maintain commercial paper programs and a credit facility. our investments primarily include available-for-sale debt securities, including u.s. and non-u.s. government and agency securities, corporate debt securities, mortgage-backed securities, and other asset-backed securities. refer to note 5 to the consolidated financial statements in "item 8. financial statements and supplementary data" in this annual report on form 10-k for additional information regarding fair value measurements. we maintain multicurrency commercial paper programs for short-term financing, which allow us to issue unsecured commercial paper notes on a private placement basis up to a maximum aggregate amount outstanding at any time of $3.5 billion. at april 25, 2025 and april 26, 2024, we had no and $1.1 billion of commercial paper outstanding, respectively. the issuance of commercial paper reduces the amount of credit available under our existing line of credit, as explained below. we also have a $3.5 billion five-year syndicated credit facility (credit facility), which expires in december 2029. at each anniversary date of the credit facility, we can request a one-year extension of the maturity date. the credit facility provides backup funding for the commercial paper programs and may also be used for general corporate purposes. the credit facility provides us with the ability to increase our borrowing capacity by an additional $1.0 billion at any time during the term of the agreement. at april 25, 2025 and april 26, 2024, no amounts were outstanding under the credit facility. interest rates on advances of our credit facility are determined by a pricing matrix based on our long-term debt ratings assigned by standard & poor's ratings services (s&p) and moody's investors service (moody’s). facility fees are payable on the credit facility and are determined in the same manner as the interest rates. we are in compliance with all covenants related to the credit facility. the following table is a summary of our s&p and moody's long-term debt ratings and short-term debt ratings: agency rating (1) april 25, 2025april 26, 2024 standard & poor's ratings services long-term debtaa short-term debta-1a-1 moody's investors service long-term debta3a3 short-term debtp-2p-2 (1) agency ratings are subject to change, and there may be no assurance that an agency will continue to provide ratings and/or maintain its current ratings. a security rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold securities, and may be subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the rating agency, and each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating. s&p and moody's long-term debt ratings and short-term debt ratings at april 25, 2025 were unchanged as compared to the ratings at april 26, 2024. we do not expect the s&p and moody's ratings to have a significant impact on our liquidity or future flexibility to access additional liquidity given our balance sheet, credit facility, and related commercial paper programs. 43 contractual obligations and cash requirements we have future contractual obligations and other minimum commercial commitments that are entered into in the normal course of business, some of which are recorded in our consolidated balance sheet. we believe our off-balance sheet arrangements do not have a material current or anticipated future effect on our consolidated earnings, financial position, and/or cash flows. presented below is a summary of our off-balance sheet contractual obligations and other minimum commercial commitments at april 25, 2025, as well as long-term contractual obligations reflected in the balance sheet at april 25, 2025. maturity by fiscal year (in millions)total20262027202820292030thereafter contractual obligations related to off-balance sheet arrangements: commitments to fund minority investments, milestone payments, and royalty obligations(1) $163 $88 $38 $34 $4 $— $— interest payments(2) 8,538 639 622 602 616 578 5,481 other(3) 1,605 486 364 277 210 178 89 contractual obligations reflected in the balance sheet(4): debt obligations(5) $28,691 $2,874 $1,721 $1,006 $2,290 $977 $19,824 operating leases1,294 218 199 155 119 100 503 contingent consideration(6) 81 31 36 12 2 — — tax obligations(7) 550 550 — — — — — (1)includes commitments related to the funding of minority investments, estimated milestone payments, and royalty obligations. while it is not certain if and/or when payments will be made, the maturity dates included in the table reflect our best estimates. (2)includes the contractual interest payments on our outstanding debt and excludes the impacts of debt premium and discount amortization. see note 6 to the consolidated financial statements in “item 8. financial statements and supplementary data” in this annual report on form 10-k for additional information on our debt agreements. (3)includes inventory purchase commitments, research and development, and other arrangements that are legally binding and specify minimum purchase quantities or spending amounts. these purchase commitments do not exceed our projected requirements and are in the normal course of business. excludes open purchase orders with a remaining term of less than one year. (4)excludes defined benefit plan obligations, guarantee obligations, uncertain tax positions, non-current tax liabilities, and litigation settlements for which we cannot make a reliable estimate of the period of cash settlement. for further information, see notes 13, 15, and 18 to the consolidated financial statements in “item 8. financial statements and supplementary data” in this annual report on form 10-k. (5)includes the current and non-current portion of our contractual maturities of debt, excluding deferred financing costs and debt discounts, net. see note 6 to the consolidated financial statements in “item 8. financial statements and supplementary data” in this annual report on form 10-k for additional information on our debt agreements. (6)includes the fair value of our current and non-current portions of contingent consideration. while it is not certain if and/or when payments will be made, the maturity dates included in this table reflect our best estimates. (7)represents the tax obligations associated with the transition tax that resulted from u.s. tax reform. the transition tax will be paid over an eight-year period and will not accrue interest. in the normal course of business, we periodically enter into agreements that require us to indemnify customers or suppliers for specific risks, such as claims for injury or property damage arising as a result of our products or the negligence of our personnel or claims alleging that our products infringe third-party patents or other intellectual property. our maximum exposure under these indemnification provisions is unable to be estimated, and we have not accrued any liabilities within our consolidated financial statements or included any indemnification provisions in the table above. historically, we have not experienced significant losses on these types of indemnification agreements. note 18 to the consolidated financial statements in "item 8. financial statements and supplementary data" in this annual report on form 10-k provides information regarding amounts we have accrued related to legal matters. in accordance with u.s. gaap, we record a liability in our consolidated financial statements for these matters when a loss is known or considered probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated. actual settlements may be different than estimated and could have a material effect on our consolidated earnings, financial position, and/or cash flows. we record tax liabilities in our consolidated financial statements for amounts that we expect to repatriate from subsidiaries (to the extent the repatriation would be subject to tax); however, no tax liabilities are recorded for amounts we consider to be permanently reinvested. we expect to have access to the majority of our cash flows in the future. in addition, we continue to evaluate our legal entity structure supporting our business operations, and to the extent such evaluation results in a change to our overall business structure, we may be required to accrue for additional tax obligations. 44 additionally, we have entered into various arrangements with affiliates of blackstone life sciences advisors l.l.c. (collectively, "blackstone") to receive funding related to the development of certain products, which may give rise to potential regulatory or commercialization milestone payments and royalties based on a percentage of sales of such products. payments under these agreements generally become due and payable only upon the achievement of certain development, regulatory and/or commercialization milestones or relevant product sales, which may span several years and which may never occur. these contractual obligations are not included within the table above. refer to note 3 to the consolidated financial statements in "item 8. financial statements and supplementary data" in this annual report on form 10-k for additional information. beyond the contractual obligations and other minimum commercial commitments outlined above, we have recurring cash requirements arising from the normal operation of our business that include capital expenditures, research and developments costs, and other operational costs. we believe our balance sheet and liquidity provide us with flexibility, and our cash, cash equivalents, current investments, credit facility and related commercial paper programs, as well as our ability to generate operating cash flows, will satisfy our current and future contractual obligations and cash requirements. we regularly review our capital needs and consider various investing and financing alternatives to support our requirements. acquisitions and dispositions information regarding acquisitions and disposition activity is included in note 3 of the consolidated financial statements in "item 8. financial statements and supplementary data" within this annual report on form 10-k. in may 2025, we announced our intent to separate the diabetes business, with the intention to create a new independent, publicly traded company. the separation is expected to be completed within 18 months of the initial announcement. critical accounting estimates we have used various accounting policies to prepare the consolidated financial statements in accordance with u.s. gaap. our significant accounting policies are disclosed in note 1 to the consolidated financial statements in "item 8. financial statements and supplementary data" in this annual report on form 10-k. the preparation of the consolidated financial statements, in conformity with u.s. gaap, requires us to use judgment in making estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses. these estimates reflect our best judgment about economic and market conditions and the potential effects on the valuation and/or carrying value of assets and liabilities based upon relevant information available. we base our estimates on historical experience and on various assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. our critical accounting estimates include the following: revenue recognition revenue recognition on our products varies depending on the amount of consideration we ultimately receive due to return terms, sales rebates, chargebacks, discounts, and other incentives, which are accounted for as variable consideration. the estimate of variable consideration for rebates and distributor chargebacks is considered critical due to the materiality of the balances and use of estimates. estimates for rebates are based on sales terms, historical experience, and trend analysis. the company considers the lag time between the point of sale and payment of the rebate claim, the stated rebate rates, and other relevant information to estimate rebates. revenue adjustments related to distributor chargebacks are the difference between distributor sales price and the end-customer negotiated price. a provision for outstanding chargebacks is recorded when we recognize revenue from our sale to the distributor and requires estimates for the distributor chargeback rate, expected sell-through levels by the distributors to contracted customers, as well as estimated distributor inventory levels. at april 25, 2025 and april 26, 2024, there were $1.7 billion and $1.6 billion of rebates and chargebacks recorded in the consolidated balance sheets, respectively. during fiscal year 2025, adjustments to rebate and chargebacks recorded in prior periods were not material. litigation contingencies we are involved in a number of legal actions from time to time involving product liability, employment, intellectual property and commercial disputes, shareholder-related matters, environmental proceedings, tax disputes, and governmental proceedings and investigations. the outcomes of legal actions are not within the company's complete control and may not be known for prolonged periods of time. in some actions, the enforcement agencies or private claimants seek damages, as well as other civil or criminal remedies (including injunctions barring the sale of products that are the subject of the proceeding), that could require significant expenditures, result in lost revenues, or limit the company's ability to conduct business in the applicable jurisdictions. estimating probable losses from our litigation and governmental proceedings is inherently difficult, particularly when the matters are in early procedural stages, with incomplete scientific facts or legal discovery, involve unsubstantiated or indeterminate claims for damages, potentially involve penalties, fines, or punitive damages, or could result in a change in business practice. we base our judgments on the best information 45 available at the time. our estimates related to our legal and product liability accruals may change as additional information becomes available to us, including information related to the nature or existence of claims against us, trial court or appellate proceedings, and mediation, arbitration or settlement proceedings. any revision of our estimates of potential liability could have a material impact on our financial position and operating results. our significant legal proceedings are discussed in note 18 to the consolidated financial statements in "item 8. financial statements and supplementary data" in this annual report on form 10-k. income tax reserves we establish reserves when, despite our belief that our tax return positions are fully supportable, we believe that certain positions are likely to be challenged and that we may or may not prevail. under u.s. gaap, if we determine that a tax position is more likely than not of being sustained upon audit, based solely on the technical merits of the position, we recognize the benefit. we measure the benefit by determining the amount that is greater than 50 percent likely of being realized upon settlement. we presume that all tax positions will be examined by a taxing authority with full knowledge of all relevant information. the calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax regulations in a multitude of jurisdictions across our global operations. we regularly monitor our tax positions and tax liabilities. we reevaluate the technical merits of our tax positions and recognize an uncertain tax benefit, or derecognize a previously recorded tax benefit, when there is (i) a completion of a tax audit, (ii) effective settlement of an issue, (iii) a change in applicable tax law including a tax case or legislative guidance, or (iv) the expiration of the applicable statute of limitations. these reserves are subject to a high degree of estimation and management judgment. although we believe that we have adequately reserved for liabilities resulting from tax assessments by taxing authorities, positions taken by these tax authorities could have a material impact on our effective tax rate, consolidated earnings, financial position, and/or cash flows. valuation of intangible assets and goodwill when we acquire a business, the assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recorded at their respective fair values at the acquisition date. goodwill is the excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair value of identified net assets of acquired businesses. intangible assets primarily include patents, trademarks, tradenames, customer relationships, purchased technology, and in-process research and development. determining the fair value of intangible assets acquired as part of a business combination requires us to make significant estimates. these estimates include the amount and timing of projected future cash flows of each project or technology, the discount rate used to discount those cash flows to present value, and the assessment of the asset’s life cycle. the estimates could be impacted by legal, technical, regulatory, economic, and competitive risks. we have four goodwill reporting units with goodwill assigned to them. we assess the impairment of goodwill at the reporting unit level annually as of the first day of the third quarter and whenever an event occurs or circumstances change that would indicate that the carrying amount may be impaired. the test for impairment of goodwill requires us to make several estimates related to projected future cash flows to determine the fair value of the goodwill reporting units. we estimated the fair value of these reporting units using the income and the market approaches, weighted 50 percent each. fair value under the income approach was determined by discounting to present value the estimated future cash flows of the reporting unit. fair value under the market approach utilized revenue and earnings multiples using comparable public company information, which uses valuation indicators determined from other businesses that are similar to our reporting unit. we use estimates that are consistent with the highest and best use of the assets based on a market participant's view of the assets being evaluated. the most critical assumptions used in the calculation of the fair value of each reporting unit are the projected revenue, projected earnings, projected future cash flows, and discount rate. our forecast of future cash flows is based on estimates of projected revenue and projected earnings, based primarily on pricing, raw material costs, market share, industry outlook, general economic conditions and strategic actions to improve our earnings. the fair value of the reporting unit’s goodwill is sensitive to differences between estimated and actual cash flows, including changes in the projected revenue, projected earnings, and discount rate used to evaluate the fair value of the reporting unit. the following table highlights the sensitivities of the most critical assumptions used in the goodwill impairment test as of the date of our annual testing: assumption: approximate % by which the fair value exceeds the carrying value based on annual impairment test20% - 312% approximate % by which the fair value exceeds the carrying value if the discount rate was to increase 1%12% - 282% approximate % by which the fair value exceeds the carrying value if the future cash flows in the income approach and revenue and earnings in the market approach were to decrease by 5%13% - 290% although we believe our estimate of fair value is reasonable, actual results may differ from our estimates due to a number of factors including, among others, changes in competitive conditions, timing of regulatory approval, results of clinical trials, changes in worldwide economic conditions, and fluctuations in currency exchange rates. new accounting pronouncements information regarding new accounting pronouncements is included in note 1 to the consolidated financial statements in “item 8. financial statements and supplementary data” in this annual report on form 10-k. 46 supplemental guarantor financial information medtronic plc and medtronic global holdings s.c.a. (medtronic luxco), a wholly-owned subsidiary guarantor, each have provided full and unconditional guarantees of the obligations of medtronic, inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary issuer, under the senior notes (medtronic senior notes) and full and unconditional guarantees of the obligations of covidien international finance s.a. (cifsa), a wholly-owned subsidiary issuer, under the senior notes (cifsa senior notes). the guarantees of the cifsa senior notes are in addition to the guarantees of the cifsa senior notes by covidien ltd. and covidien group holdings ltd., both of which are wholly-owned subsidiary guarantors of the cifsa senior notes. medtronic plc and medtronic, inc. each have provided a full and unconditional guarantee of the obligations of medtronic luxco under the senior notes (medtronic luxco senior notes). the following is a summary of these guarantees: guarantees of medtronic senior notes •parent company guarantor - medtronic plc •subsidiary issuer - medtronic, inc. •subsidiary guarantor - medtronic luxco guarantees of medtronic luxco senior notes •parent company guarantor - medtronic plc •subsidiary issuer - medtronic luxco •subsidiary guarantor - medtronic, inc. guarantees of cifsa senior notes •parent company guarantor - medtronic plc •subsidiary issuer - cifsa •subsidiary guarantors - medtronic luxco, covidien ltd., and covidien group holdings ltd. (cifsa subsidiary guarantors) the following tables present summarized financial information for the fiscal year ended april 25, 2025 for the obligor groups of medtronic and medtronic luxco senior notes, and cifsa senior notes. the obligor group consists of the parent company guarantor, subsidiary issuer, and subsidiary guarantors for the applicable senior notes. the summarized financial information is presented after elimination of (i) intercompany transactions and balances among the guarantors and issuers and (ii) equity in earnings from and investments in any subsidiary that is a non-guarantor or issuer. the summarized results of operations information for the fiscal year ended april 25, 2025 was as follows: (in millions)medtronic & medtronic luxco senior notes (1) cifsa senior notes (2) net sales$3,218 $— operating loss(43)(57) loss before income taxes(719)(15) net loss attributable to medtronic(622)(12) the summarized balance sheet information for the fiscal year ended april 25, 2025 was as follows: (in millions)medtronic & medtronic luxco senior notes (1) cifsa senior notes (2) total current assets(3) $18,268 $4,799 total noncurrent assets(4) 11,356 5,207 total current liabilities(5) 21,099 7,625 total noncurrent liabilities(6) 38,903 25,403 noncontrolling interests232 232 (1)the medtronic senior notes and medtronic luxco senior notes obligor group consists of the following entities: medtronic plc, medtronic luxco, and medtronic, inc. refer to the guarantee summary above for further details. (2)the cifsa senior notes obligor group consists of the following entities: medtronic plc, medtronic luxco, cifsa, and cifsa subsidiary guarantors. refer to the guarantee summary above for further details. (3)includes receivables due from non-guarantor subsidiaries of $14.2 billion and $1.3 billion for medtronic & medtronic luxco senior notes, and cifsa senior notes, respectively. (4)includes loans receivable due from non-guarantor subsidiaries of $5.2 billion and $5.2 billion for medtronic & medtronic luxco senior notes, and cifsa senior notes, respectively. (5)includes payables due to non-guarantor subsidiaries of $16.0 billion and $4.6 billion for medtronic & medtronic luxco senior notes, and cifsa senior notes, respectively. (6)includes loans payable due to non-guarantor subsidiaries of $11.3 billion and $7.7 billion for medtronic & medtronic luxco senior notes, and cifsa senior notes, respectively.