table of contents item 7. management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations you should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes and other financial information appearing elsewhere in this annual report on form 10-k. some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this annual report on form 10-k, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. as a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in “part i, item 1a - risk factors” section of this annual report on form 10-k, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. overview we are a biotechnology company pioneering messenger rna (mrna) therapeutics and vaccines to create a new generation of transformative medicines to improve the lives of patients. mrna medicines are designed to direct the body’s cells to produce intracellular, membrane, or secreted proteins that have a therapeutic or preventive benefit with the potential to address a broad spectrum of diseases. our platform builds on continuous advances in basic and applied mrna science, delivery technology and manufacturing, providing us the capability to pursue in parallel a robust pipeline of new development candidates. we are developing therapeutics and vaccines for infectious diseases, immuno-oncology, rare diseases, autoimmune diseases and cardiovascular diseases, independently and with our strategic collaborators. within our platform, we develop technologies that enable the development of mrna medicines for diverse applications. when we identify technologies that we believe could enable a new group of potential mrna medicines with shared product features, we call that group a “modality.” while the programs within a modality may target diverse diseases, they share similar mrna technologies, delivery technologies, and manufacturing processes to achieve shared product features. the programs within a modality will also generally share similar pharmacology profiles, including the desired dose response, the expected dosing regimen, the target tissue for protein expression, safety and tolerability goals, and pharmaceutical properties. programs within a modality often have correlated technology risk, but because they pursue diverse diseases they often have uncorrelated biology risk. we have created six modalities to date: •prophylactic vaccines; •systemic secreted and cell surface therapeutics; •cancer vaccines; •intratumoral immuno-oncology; •localized regenerative therapeutics; and •systemic intracellular therapeutics. we have designated our prophylactic vaccines and systemic secreted and cell surface therapeutics modalities as our “core modalities”. in these core modalities, our strategy is to invest in additional development candidates using our accumulated innovations in technology, our process insights and our preclinical and clinical experience. our exploratory modalities continue to be a critical part of advancing our strategy to maximize the application of our potential mrna medicines. 2020 business highlights we brought five new development candidates forward in 2020: a covid-19 vaccine (mrna-1273); interleukin-2 (il-2); programmed death-ligand 1 (pd-l1); a pediatric respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) vaccine; and an epstein-barr virus (ebv) vaccine, as part of our mission to use our technology to advance global public health. in response to the global coronavirus pandemic, we are pursuing the rapid development and manufacture of our mrna-1273 vaccine, for the treatment of sars-cov-2, the novel strain of coronavirus that causes covid-19, in collaboration with the vaccine research center and division of microbiology and infectious diseases of the national institute of allergy and infectious diseases, or niaid, part of the national institutes of health, or nih. the progress of mrna-1273 during 2020 has resulted in the need for us to devote significant resources toward the development and manufacture of this product. significant capital investment is necessary for ongoing clinical development, manufacturing and distribution of the covid-19 vaccine at a scale necessary to meet demand in a global pandemic environment. this capital investment includes the ongoing clinical development for updated versions of the covid-19 vaccine that may provide continued protection against variants of the sars-cov-2 virus. barda has committed to fund up to $954.9 million to accelerate the clinical development and manufacturing process scale-up of our covid-19 vaccine. under the terms of the agreement, barda will fund the advancement of mrna-1273 to fda licensure and the scale-up of manufacturing processes. the agreement does not contemplate any product stockpiling. in february and may 2020, we completed two separate public equity offerings, resulting in aggregate net proceeds of $1.85 billion, net of underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses. this additional funding has enabled us to substantially expand our manufacturing network, purchase the required capital equipment, hire appropriate global staff and secure the raw materials and other consumables to manufacture substantial doses of our covid-19 vaccine. in december 2020, we received an emergency use authorization (eua) from the u.s. food and drug administration (fda) and an interim order from health canada authorizing our covid-19 vaccine for use in the u.s. and canada. since january 1, 2021, we have received additional provisional, interim or conditional approvals for the use and distribution of our covid-19 vaccine from regulatory authorities in the european union, the united kingdom, switzerland, qatar, israel and singapore. in august 2020, we entered into a supply agreement with the u.s. government (the u.s. supply agreement) for the supply of 100 million doses of our covid-19 vaccine. the agreement was subsequently amended in december 2020, in connection with the u.s. government's exercise of an option for an additional 100 million doses, bringing the total to 200 million doses of our covid-19 vaccine for a total consideration of up to $3.19 billion. the total consideration includes approximately $300.0 million of incentive payments which we earned as a result of securing an emergency use authorization (eua) before january 31, 2021. as a result of our satisfying the requirements for this incentive payment, the total price for the supply of the first 100 million doses, inclusive of the $300.0 million incentive, is $1.53 billion. we will receive such incentive payments as product is delivered to and accepted by the u.s. government. pursuant to the u.s. supply agreement, the u.s. government made a $601.4 million upfront payment to us which represents approximately 50% of the fixed price per dose that we are entitled to receive for the committed first 100 million doses. we will receive the remainder of the fixed price per dose upon delivery and acceptance of contracted doses to the u.s. government. we are required to secure, manage and maintain storage for any contracted doses of mrna-1273 based on the specific requirements of the contract and deliver the product to designated government facilities. we will be reimbursed for such services at a negotiated price. subsequent to december 31, 2020, the u.s. government exercised a second option to purchase 100 million doses on february 11, 2021, bringing its total order to 300 million doses, with a remaining option for 200 million doses. the price for each option is fixed at a price of $1.65 billion per 100 million doses. the u.s. supply agreement contains terms and conditions that are customary for u.s. government agreements of this nature, including provisions giving the u.s. government the right to terminate the agreement if the applicable contracting officer determines that a termination is in the u.s. government’s interest. following any such termination, we and the u.s. government may agree upon the amount to be paid or remaining to be paid to us because of the termination. in addition, we have entered into supply agreements with several other governmental agencies outside the united states for the supply of our covid-19 vaccine. the agreements are generally subject to receipt of authorization or approval for the use and distribution of the vaccine from the relevant regulatory authority in each jurisdiction. under these agreements, we are entitled to upfront deposits for our covid-19 vaccine supply, initially recorded as deferred revenue. as of december 31, 2020, we had approximately $3.80 billion in deferred revenue in connection with the supply agreements with the u.s. government and other governmental agencies, which will be recognized as revenue when revenue recognition criteria have been met. between the granting of the eua by the fda on december 18, 2020 and the end of 2020, we delivered 12.8 million doses of our covid-19 vaccine and recognized product sales of $199.9 million. in addition, we delivered 4.0 million doses of our covid-19 vaccine to the u.s. government under the barda agreement through december 31, 2020, for a total of nearly 17 million doses delivered to the u.s. government and canada between receipt of our eua authorization and the end of the year and satisfying the criteria for revenue recognition. for more information on our strategic priorities for 2021, please see “business—the mrna opportunity—our strategic priorities,” above. the early investment we made in our manufacturing and digital capabilities prepared us to rapidly scale our production to accommodate between 700 million doses and 1 billion doses of our covid-19 vaccine in 2021. we are continuing to invest and add staff to build up to potentially 1 billion doses for 2021. we have a diverse development pipeline, and the broad potential applications of mrna medicines have led us to raise significant capital and adopt a long-term approach to capital allocation that balances near-term risks and long-term value creation. as of december 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and investments of approximately $5.25 billion, of which $82.1 million was related to product sales and $2.84 billion was related to customer deposits for the future supply of our covid-19 vaccine. we use this capital to fund operations and investing activities for technology creation, drug discovery and clinical development programs, infrastructure and capabilities to enable our research engine and early development engine (which includes our moderna technology center), our digital infrastructure, creation of our portfolio of intellectual property, acquisition of key raw materials and supplies to support our commercial production quantities, development of a commercial team, expansion into global markets and administrative support. since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. our net losses were $747.1 million, $514.0 million and $384.7 million for the years ended december 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. as of december 31, 2020, our accumulated deficit was $2.24 billion. for the foreseeable future, we may continue to incur significant expenses in connection with our ongoing activities, including as we: •continue our platform research and drug discovery and development efforts; •conduct clinical trials for our investigational medicines; •manufacture our covid-19 vaccine; •manufacture clinical trial materials and develop large-scale manufacturing capabilities; •seek regulatory approval for our investigational medicines; •maintain, expand, and protect our intellectual property; •hire additional personnel to support our program development effort to obtain regulatory approval and secure additional facilities for operations; •build up our commercial operations and organization; and •continue to operate as a public company. if we seek to obtain regulatory approval for and commercialize further of our investigational medicines, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses, which include establishing a sales, marketing, manufacturing, and distribution infrastructure globally. as a result, we may need substantial additional funding to support our continued operations and pursue our growth strategy in addition to our product sales. if we fail to become profitable or are unable to sustain profitability on a continuing basis, we may be required to finance our operations through a combination of public or private equity offerings, structured financings and debt financings, government funding arrangements, strategic alliances and marketing, manufacturing, distribution, and licensing arrangements. we may not be able to raise additional funds or enter into such other agreements on favorable terms, or at all. if we fail to raise capital or enter into such agreements as, and when, needed, we may have to significantly delay, scale back, or discontinue the development and commercialization of one or more of our programs. because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with pharmaceutical development, we are unable to predict the timing or amount of expenses or when or if we will be able to achieve or maintain profitability. if we fail to become profitable or are unable to sustain profitability on a continuing basis, then we may be unable to continue our operations at planned levels and be forced to reduce our operations. the covid-19 pandemic impacted certain of our business operations. for instance, we are experiencing disruptions in the conduct of certain of our clinical trials, including our ability to initiate and complete our clinical trials within the originally anticipated timelines. site initiation, participant recruitment and enrollment, participant dosing, distribution of clinical trial materials, study monitoring and data analysis may or continue to be paused or delayed. while to date we have not experienced significant disruptions in our supply chain and distribution, an extended duration of this pandemic could result in such disruptions in the future. financial operations overview revenue the following table summarizes revenue for each period presented (in thousands): years ended december 31, 202020192018 revenue: grant revenue $528,905 $12,173 $12,556 product sales199,872 — — collaboration revenue74,618 48,036 122,512 total revenue $803,395 $60,209 $135,068 we began to record product sales for our covid-19 vaccine subsequent to its authorization for emergency use by the fda and health canada in december 2020. for the year ended december 31, 2020, we recognized $199.9 million of product sales from sales of our covid-19 vaccine. other than product sales, our revenue has been primarily derived from government-sponsored and private organizations including barda, darpa and the gates foundation and from strategic alliances with astrazeneca, merck and vertex to discover, develop, and commercialize potential mrna medicines. the following table summarizes collaboration revenue for the periods presented (in thousands): years ended december 31, 202020192018 barda$521,652 $7,608 $6,736 other grant revenue7,253 4,565 5,820 total grant revenue$528,905 $12,173 $12,556 grant revenue from barda increased significantly in 2020, as a result of an award to accelerate development of our covid-19 vaccine. the following table summarizes collaboration revenue for the periods presented (in thousands): years ended december 31, 202020192018 collaboration revenue: astrazeneca $32,624 $5,233 $45,993 merck 26,076 36,608 66,082 vertex 15,505 6,195 10,437 other 413 — — total collaboration revenue $74,618 $48,036 $122,512 we expect our product sales to significantly increase in 2021. as of december 31, 2020, we had signed supply agreements of approximately $11.65 billion for the future supply of our covid-19 vaccine and had deferred revenue of $3.80 billion associated with customer deposits received or billable under these agreements. additional supply agreements have been agreed upon since december 31, 2020, and others are under discussion for 2021 and 2022 deliveries. in addition, we expect to continue to receive funding from our contract with barda. as of december 31, 2020, the remaining available funding net of revenue earned was $444.3 million. to the extent that existing or potential future products generate revenue, our revenue may vary due to many uncertainties in the independent development of our mrna medicines and pursuant to our strategic alliances and other factors. we expect to continue to incur significant expenses as we continue our research and development and commercialization efforts. we expect our programs to mature and advance to later stage clinical development, and we expect expenses to increase as we seek regulatory approvals for our investigational medicines and commercialize any approved mrna medicines. if we fail to become profitable or are unable to sustain profitability on a continuing basis, we may incur losses in the future. cost of sales cost of sales includes raw materials, personnel and facility and other costs associated with manufacturing our commercial product. these costs include production materials, production costs at our manufacturing facilities, third-party manufacturing costs, and final formulation and packaging costs. cost of sales also includes shipping costs and royalties payable to third parties based on sales of our products. research and development expenses the nature of our business and primary focus of our activities generate a significant amount of research and development costs. research and development expenses represent costs incurred by us for the following: •cost to develop our platform; •discovery efforts leading to development candidates; •preclinical, nonclinical, and clinical development costs for our programs; •costs related to pre-launch inventory; •cost to develop our manufacturing technology and infrastructure; and •digital infrastructure costs. the costs above comprise the following categories: •personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation expense; •expenses incurred under agreements with third parties, such as consultants, investigative sites, contract research organizations, or cros, that conduct our preclinical studies and clinical trials, and in-licensing arrangements; •expenses associated with developing manufacturing capabilities and acquiring materials for preclinical studies, clinical trials and pre-launch inventory, including both internal manufacturing and third-party contract manufacturing organizations, or cmos; •expenses incurred for the procurement of materials, laboratory supplies, and non-capital equipment used in the research and development process; and •facilities, depreciation, and amortization, and other direct and allocated expenses incurred as a result of research and development activities. we use our employee and infrastructure resources for the advancement of our platform, and for discovering and developing programs. due to the number of ongoing programs and our ability to use resources across several projects, indirect or shared operating costs incurred for our research and development programs are generally not recorded or maintained on a program- or modality-specific basis. the following table reflects our research and development expenses, including direct program specific expenses summarized by modality and indirect or shared operating costs summarized under other research and development expenses during the years ended december 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 (in thousands): years ended december 31, 202020192018 program expenses by modality: prophylactic vaccines $707,150 $47,650 $25,404 cancer vaccines 29,440 44,003 35,891 intratumoral immuno-oncology 8,755 17,607 15,405 systemic secreted and cell surface therapeutics 1,503 11,240 18,207 localized regenerative therapeutics 4 3,326 91 systemic intracellular therapeutics 20,982 33,360 45,695 total program-specific expenses by modality (1) 767,834 157,186 140,693 other research and development expenses: discovery programs 55,601 55,376 34,643 platform research 93,501 91,097 91,720 technical development and unallocated manufacturing expenses 279,489 85,304 83,117 shared discovery and development expenses 117,759 59,087 44,250 stock-based compensation 56,155 48,259 37,659 other expenses(2) — — 22,000 total research and development expenses $1,370,339 $496,309 $454,082 __________ (1)includes a total of 21 development candidates at each of december 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. program-specific expenses include external costs and allocated manufacturing costs of pre-launch inventory, mrna supply and consumables, and are reflected as of the beginning of the period in which the program was internally advanced to development or removed if development was ceased. (2)relates to an in-licensing agreement entered into in june 2017 with cellscript, llc to sublicense certain patent rights. a “modality” refers to a group of programs with common product features and the associated combination of enabling mrna technologies, delivery technologies, and manufacturing processes. the program-specific expenses by modality summarized in the table above include expenses we directly attribute to our programs, which consist primarily of external costs, such as fees paid to outside consultants, central laboratories, investigative sites, and cros in connection with our preclinical studies and clinical trials, cmos, and allocated manufacturing costs of pre-launch inventory, mrna supply and consumables. costs to acquire and manufacture pre-launch inventory, mrna supply for preclinical studies and clinical trials are recognized and included in unallocated manufacturing expenses when incurred, and subsequently allocated to program-specific manufacturing costs after completion of the program-specific production. the timing of allocating manufacturing costs to the specific program varies depending on the program development and production schedule. we generally do not allocate personnel-related costs, including stock-based compensation, costs associated with our general platform research, technical development, and other shared costs on a program-specific basis. these costs were therefore excluded from the summary of program-specific expenses by modality. discovery program expenses are costs associated with research activities for our programs in the preclinical discovery stage, and primarily consist of external costs for cros and lab services, and allocated manufacturing cost of preclinical mrna supply and consumables. platform research expenses are mainly costs to develop technical advances in mrna science, delivery science, and manufacturing process design. these costs include personnel-related costs, computer equipment, facilities, preclinical mrna supply and consumables, and other administrative costs to support our platform research. technology development and unallocated manufacturing expenses are primarily related to non-program-specific manufacturing process development and manufacturing costs. shared discovery and development expenses are research and development costs such as personnel-related costs and other costs, which are not otherwise included in development programs, discovery programs, platform research, technical development and unallocated manufacturing expenses, stock-based compensation, and other expenses. the largest component of our total operating expenses has historically been our investment in research and development activities, including development of our platform, mrna technologies, and manufacturing technologies. we expense research and development costs as incurred and cannot reasonably estimate the nature, timing, and estimated costs required to complete the development of the development candidates and investigational medicines we are currently developing or may develop in the future. there are numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the research and development of such development candidates and investigational medicines, including, but not limited to: •scope, progress, and expense of developing ongoing and future development candidates and investigational medicines; •entry in and completion of related preclinical studies; •enrollment in and completion of subsequent clinical trials; •safety and efficacy of investigational medicines resulting from these clinical trials; •changes in laws or regulations relevant to the investigational medicines in development; •receipt of the required regulatory approvals; and •commercialization, including establishing manufacturing and marketing capabilities. as we continue to progress mrna-1273 through the development process toward a biologics license application approval and indication expansion of mrna-1273 during the current pandemic, we expect to continue to incur significant additional expenses. at this time, the magnitude of these potential expenditures is not known. in connection with the barda agreement to accelerate development of mrna-1273, significant grant revenue and expenses are expected in 2021. barda's funding is expected to offset those expenses that are covered under the barda agreement, subject to our obtaining reimbursement from barda. changes in expectations or outcomes of any of the known or unknown risks and uncertainties may materially impact our expected research and development expenditures. continued research and development is central to the ongoing activities of our business. investigational medicines in later stages of clinical development, such as our cmv vaccine (mrna-1647) and our covid-19 vaccine, generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. we expect our research and development costs to continue to increase in the foreseeable future as our investigational medicines progress through the development phases and identify and develop additional programs. there are numerous factors associated with the successful commercialization of any of our investigational medicines, including future trial design and various regulatory requirements, many of which cannot be determined with accuracy at this time due to the early stage of development of our investigational medicines. moreover, future commercial and regulatory factors beyond our control will impact our clinical development programs and plans. selling, general and administrative expenses we started to incur sales and marketing expenses in the fourth quarter of 2020 to prepare for commercial operations in connection with the sale of our covid-19 vaccine. selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs, including stock-based compensation, for executives, finance, legal, human resources, business development and other administrative and operational functions, professional fees, accounting and legal services, information technology and facility-related costs, and expenses associated with obtaining and maintaining intellectual property, or ip. these costs relate to the operation of the business, unrelated to the research and development function, or any individual program. selling, general and administrative expenses, including ip-related expenses, totaled $188.3 million, $109.6 million and $94.3 million for the years ended december 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. ip-related expenses, including our internal personnel-related costs, were $13.5 million, $13.4 million and $11.9 million, for the years ended december 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. we anticipate selling, general and administrative expenses will increase as we continue to expand the number of programs in development and prepare for the establishment of commercial activities both within and outside the united states. we have already incurred additional expenses related to building out a regulatory, sales and marketing team to support the sale, marketing and distribution of our covid-19 vaccine. if we obtain regulatory approval for any of our investigational medicines, and do not enter into one or more third-party commercialization collaboration and manufacturing arrangements, we will incur significant additional expenses related to building out these functions. we have a broad ip portfolio covering our development and commercialization of mrna vaccine and therapeutic programs, including those related to mrna design, formulation, and manufacturing platform technologies. we regularly file patent applications to protect innovations arising from our research and development. we also hold trademarks and trademark applications in the united states and foreign jurisdictions. costs to secure and defend our ip are expensed as incurred, and are classified as selling, general and administrative expenses. interest income interest income consists of interest generated from our investments in cash and cash equivalents, money market funds, and high-quality fixed income securities. other expense, net other expense, net consists of interest expense, gains (losses) from the sale of investments in marketable securities, and other income and expense unrelated to our core operations. interest expense is primarily derived from our finance leases related to our moderna technology center manufacturing facility, or mtc south, and moderna technology center north, or mtc north. critical accounting policies and significant judgments and estimates our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles. the preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make judgments and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. we base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. on an ongoing basis, we evaluate our judgments and estimates in light of changes in circumstances, facts, and experience. the effects of material revisions in estimates, if any, are reflected in the consolidated financial statements prospectively from the date of change in estimates. while our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this annual report on form 10-k, we believe the following accounting policies used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements require the most significant judgments and estimates. revenue recognition product sales product sales are associated with our covid-19 vaccine supply agreements with the u.s. government and international government agencies. these agreements generally do not provide provisions for various forms of variable consideration, such as discounts, rebates or returns. we recognize revenue from product sales, using the five-step model under asc 606, based on the fixed price per dose according to the contracts when control of the product transfers to the customer and customer acceptance has occurred, unless such acceptance provisions are deemed perfunctory. collaboration revenue our alliances with strategic collaborators typically contain multiple elements, including research and other licenses, options to obtain development and commercialization rights, research and development services, obligations to develop and manufacture preclinical and clinical material, and options to obtain additional research and development services and preclinical and clinical material. such arrangements provide for various types of payments to us, including upfront fees, funding of research and development services and preclinical and clinical material, technical, development, regulatory, and commercial milestone payments, licensing fees, option exercise fees, and royalty and earnout payments on product sales. such payments are often not commensurate with the timing of revenue recognition and therefore result in deferral of revenue recognition. we analyze our collaboration arrangements to assess whether they are within the scope of accounting standards codification asc topic 808, collaborative arrangements (asc 808), to determine whether such arrangements involve joint operating activities performed by parties that are both active participants in the activities and exposed to significant risks and rewards that are dependent on the commercial success of such activities. if we conclude that some or all aspects of the arrangement are within the scope of asc 808 and do not represent a transaction with a customer, we recognize our allocation of the shared costs incurred with respect to the jointly conducted activities as a component of the related expense in the period incurred. if we conclude that some or all aspects of the arrangement represent a transaction with a customer, we account for those aspects of the arrangement within the scope of asc 606 (revenue from contracts with customers). to determine the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized for arrangements that we determine are within the scope of asc 606, we perform the following steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with the customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) each performance obligation is satisfied. asc 606 requires significant judgment and estimates and results in changes to, but not limited to: (i) the determination of the transaction price, including estimates of variable consideration, (ii) the allocation of the transaction price, including the determination of estimated selling price, and (iii) the pattern of recognition, including the application of proportional performance as a measure of progress on service-related promises and application of point-in-time recognition for supply-related promises. the transaction price is generally comprised of an upfront payment due at contract inception and variable consideration in the form of payments for our services and materials and milestone payments due upon the achievement of specified events. other payments the company could be entitled to include tiered royalties earned when customers recognize net sales of licensed products. we consider the existence of any significant financing component within our arrangements and have determined that a significant financing component does not exist in our arrangements as substantive business purposes exist to support the payment structure other than to provide a significant benefit of financing. we measure the transaction price based on the amount of consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for transferring the promised goods and/or services to the customer. we utilize either the expected value method or the most likely amount method to estimate the amount of variable consideration, depending on which method is expected to better predict the amount of consideration to which we will be entitled. amounts of variable consideration are included in the transaction price to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved. with respect to arrangements that include payments for a development or regulatory milestone payment, we evaluate whether the associated event is considered probable of achievement and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. milestone payments that are not within our control or the licensee, such as those dependent upon receipt of regulatory approval, are not considered to be probable of achievement until the triggering event occurs. at the end of each reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability of achievement of each milestone and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect revenue and net loss in the period of adjustment. for arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based upon the achievement of a certain level of product sales, wherein the license is deemed to be the sole or predominant item to which the payments relate, we recognize revenue upon the later of: (i) when the related sales occur or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the payment has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied). consideration that would be received for optional goods and/or services is excluded from the transaction price at contract inception. we generally allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation based on a relative standalone selling price basis. we develop assumptions that require judgment to determine the standalone selling price for each performance obligation in consideration of applicable market conditions and relevant entity-specific factors, including factors that were contemplated in negotiating the agreement with the customer and estimated research and development costs. however, in certain instances, we allocate variable consideration entirely to one or more performance obligation if the terms of the variable consideration relate to the satisfaction of the respective performance obligation and the amount allocated is consistent with the amount we would expect to receive for the satisfaction of the respective performance obligation. we recognize revenue based on the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to each respective performance obligation when or as the performance obligation is satisfied by transferring a promised good or service to the customer. for performance obligations that are satisfied at a point in time, we recognize revenue when control of the goods and/or services is transferred to the customer. for performance obligations that are satisfied over time, we recognize revenue by measuring the progress toward complete satisfaction of the performance obligation using a single method of measuring progress which depicts the performance in transferring control of the associated goods and/or services to the customer. we generally use input methods to measure the progress toward the complete satisfaction of performance obligations satisfied over time. with respect to arrangements containing a license to our intellectual property that is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, we recognize revenue from amounts allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the licensee and the licensee is able to use and benefit from the license. for licenses that are bundled with other promises, we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue. significant management judgment is required in determining the level of effort required under an arrangement and the period over which we are expected to complete our performance obligations under an arrangement. we evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjust the measure of performance and related revenue recognition. any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect revenue and net loss in the period of adjustment. prelaunch inventory prior to an initial regulatory approval for our investigational medicines, we expense costs relating to raw materials and production of inventory as research and development expense in our consolidated statements of operations, in the period incurred. when we believe regulatory approval and subsequent commercialization of our investigational medicines is probable, and we also expect future economic benefit from the sales of the investigational medicines to be realized, we will then capitalize the costs of production as inventory. upon the authorization of distribution and use of our covid-19 vaccine under an eua in december 2020, we began to capitalize inventory costs associated with our covid-19 vaccine, as it was determined that inventory costs incurred subsequent to the eua had a probable future economic benefit. research and development costs as part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses, a significant portion of which are clinical study expenses conducted by third-party service providers. this process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf, and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. the majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services performed or when contractual milestones are met. examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to: •cros to conduct our clinical trials; •investigative sites in connection with clinical trials; •vendors for laboratory services, supplies, and distribution of materials in connection with clinical trials; and •vendors in connection with preclinical development activities. we base our expenses related to clinical trials on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with cros that conduct and manage clinical trials on our behalf. the financial terms of these contracts are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. there may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of subjects and the completion of clinical trial milestones. in accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period and adjust accordingly. we make estimates of our research and development accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. we recognize costs for certain development activities based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using information and data provided to us by our vendors and our clinical sites, such as number of sites activated, number of patient enrollments and visits, and patient duration. we determine accrual estimates through financial models that take into account discussions with applicable personnel and service providers as to the progress or state of completion of trials. we periodically confirm the accuracy of these estimates with the service providers and make adjustments, if necessary. upon settlement, these costs may differ materially from the amounts accrued in our consolidated financial statements. our historical accrual estimates have not been materially different from our actual costs. however, due to the nature of estimates, we cannot provide assurance that we will not make changes to our estimates in the future as we become aware of additional information about the status or conduct of our research activities and clinical trials. stock-based compensation we issue stock-based awards to employees and non-employees, generally in the form of stock options and restricted stock units. we measure and recognize compensation expense for our stock-based awards granted to our employees and non-employee directors based on the estimated grant date fair value in accordance with asc 718, compensation—stock compensation. our stock-based awards are subject to either service or performance-based vesting conditions. we recognize compensation expense related to awards to employees and non-employee directors with service-based vesting on a straight-line basis based on the grant date fair value over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period. compensation expense related to awards to employees and non-employee directors with performance-based vesting conditions is recognized based on the grant date fair value over the requisite service period using an accelerated attribution method to the extent the achievement of the performance condition is probable. we made an accounting policy election to recognize forfeitures of stock-based awards as they occur. we classify stock-based compensation expense in our consolidated statements of operations in the same manner in which the award recipient’s salary and related costs are classified or in which the award recipient’s service payments are classified. we determine the fair value of restricted stock and restricted stock units, based on the fair value of our common stock. we estimate the fair value of our stock options using the black-scholes option pricing model, which requires inputs of subjective assumptions, including: (i) the expected volatility of our stock; (ii) the expected term of the award; (iii) the risk-free interest rate; (iv) expected dividends; and (v) the fair value of common stock. due to the lack of company specific historical and implied volatility data, we based our estimate of expected volatility on the estimate and expected volatilities of a guideline group of publicly traded companies. for these analyses, we select companies with comparable characteristics to ours including enterprise value, risk profiles, and with historical share price information sufficient to meet the expected life of the stock-based awards. we compute the historical volatility data using the daily closing prices for the selected companies’ shares during the equivalent period of the calculated expected term of our stock-based awards. we will continue to apply this process until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of our own stock price becomes available. we estimate the expected term of our stock options granted to employees and non-employee directors using the simplified method, whereby, the expected term equals the average of the vesting term and the original contractual term of the option. we utilize this method as we do not have sufficient historical exercise data to provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate the expected term. for stock options granted to non-employees, we utilize the contractual term of the option as the basis for the expected term assumption. for the determination of the risk-free interest rates we utilize the u.s. treasury yield curve for instruments in effect at the time of measurement with a term commensurate with the expected term assumption. the expected dividend yield is assumed to be zero as we have never paid dividends and do not have current plans to pay any dividends on our common stock. income taxes we account for income taxes based on an asset and liability approach. we recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements or tax returns. we determine our deferred tax assets and liabilities based on differences between financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, which are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. realization of our deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income, the amount and timing of which are uncertain. valuation allowances are provided, if, based upon the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. as of december 31, 2020, we continued to maintain a full valuation allowance against all of our deferred tax assets based on management’s evaluation of all available evidence, including our history of incurring significant losses from operations. we will continue to monitor the realizability of our deferred tax assets as we may generate profits in 2021 if we are able to fulfill our obligations under the supply agreements for our covid-19 vaccine. we may release all or a portion of the valuation allowance in the near-term; however, the release of the valuation allowance, as well as the exact timing and the amount of such release, continue to be subject to, among other things, our level of profitability, revenue growth, clinical program progression and expectations regarding future profitability. we may become subject to income tax audits and adjustments by local tax authorities. the nature of uncertain tax positions is subject to significant judgment by management and subject to change, which may be substantial. we develop our assessment of uncertain tax positions, and the associated cumulative probabilities, using internal expertise and assistance from third-party experts. as additional information becomes available, estimates are revised and refined. differences between estimates and final settlement may occur resulting in additional tax expense. we record reserves for potential tax payments to various tax authorities related to uncertain tax positions. these reserves are based on a determination of whether and how much of a tax benefit taken by us in our tax filings or positions is more likely than not to be realized following resolution of any potential contingencies present related to the tax benefit. potential interest and penalties associated with such uncertain tax positions is recorded as a component of income tax expense. recently issued accounting pronouncements we have reviewed all recently issued standards and have determined that such standards will not have a material impact on our financial statements or do not otherwise apply to our operations. results of operations the following tables summarize our consolidated statements of operations for each period presented (in thousands): years ended december 31,change 2020 vs. 2019 20202019change% revenue: grant revenue $528,905 $12,173 $516,732 4,245 % product sales199,872 — 199,872 100 % collaboration revenue 74,618 48,036 26,582 55 % total revenue 803,395 60,209 743,186 1,234 % operating expenses: cost of sales7,933 — 7,933 100 % research and development 1,370,339 496,309 874,030 176 % selling, general and administrative188,267 109,620 78,647 72 % total operating expenses 1,566,539 605,929 960,610 159 % loss from operations (763,144)(545,720)(217,424)40 % interest income 24,715 38,530 (13,815)(36)% other expense, net(6,084)(7,526)1,442 (19)% loss before provision for (benefit from) income taxes(744,513)(514,716)(229,797)45 % provision for (benefit from) income taxes2,551 (695)3,246 (467)% net loss $(747,064)$(514,021)$(233,043)45 % years ended december 31,change 2019 vs. 2018 20192018change% revenue: grant revenue $12,173 $12,556 $(383)(3)% collaboration revenue 48,036 122,512 (74,476)(61)% total revenue 60,209 135,068 (74,859)(55)% operating expenses: research and development 496,309 454,082 42,227 9 % general and administrative109,620 94,252 15,368 16 % total operating expenses 605,929 548,334 57,595 11 % loss from operations (545,720)(413,266)(132,454)32 % interest income 38,530 27,023 11,507 43 % other (expense) income, net(7,526)1,835 (9,361)(510)% loss before (benefit from) provision for income taxes(514,716)(384,408)(130,308)34 % (benefit from) provision for income taxes(695)326 (1,021)(313)% net loss $(514,021)$(384,734)$(129,287)34 % revenue total revenue increased by $743.2 million, or 1,234% in 2020, due to increases in grant revenue, product sales and collaboration revenue. grant revenue increased by $516.7 million, or 4,245% in 2020, mainly due to an increase in revenue from barda related to our covid-19 vaccine development in 2020. product revenue was $199.9 million in 2020 from sales of our covid-19 vaccine subsequent to the authorization by the fda and health canada for emergency use in december 2020. collaboration revenue increased by $26.6 million, or 55% in 2020, primarily due to increased revenue from astrazeneca and vertex attributable to a change in estimated costs for our future performance obligations under the collaboration agreement with astrazeneca and an increase in reimbursable costs under the collaboration agreement with vertex, partially offset by a decrease in revenue from merck. total revenue decreased by $74.9 million, or 55% in 2019, primarily due to decrease in collaboration revenue. collaboration revenue decreased by $74.5 million, or 61% in 2019, mainly due to decreased revenue across all our strategic alliances, particularly astrazeneca and merck, largely driven by our adoption of asc 606 and the completion of the initial four-year research period under the 2016 merck agreement. grant revenue remained relatively flat in 2019. there was a decrease in revenue from darpa as the research and development activities under the darpa awards were substantially concluded at the end of 2018, offset by increases in revenue from the gates foundation and barda. operating expenses cost of sales we began capitalizing our covid-19 vaccine inventory costs in december 2020, in connection with an emergency use authorization from the fda and an interim order from health canada for use of our covid-19 vaccine, and based upon our expectation that these costs would be recoverable through commercialization of mrna-1273. prior to the capitalization of our covid-19 vaccine inventory costs, such costs were recorded as research and development expenses in the period incurred. we expensed $242.0 million of pre-launch inventory costs in 2020. our cost of sales were $7.9 million, or 4.0% of our product sales, in 2020, comprised of third-party royalties of $6.9 million and shipping and handling costs of $1.0 million as the associated inventory costs were expensed previously. if inventory sold during 2020 was valued at cost, our cost of sales for 2020 would have been $62.4 million, or 31.2% of our product sales. at december 31, 2020, we had $187.5 million of zero-cost covid-19 vaccine inventory that we expect to sell prior to march 31, 2021. we expect our cost of sales as a percentage of our product sales will increase, reflecting the full cost of manufacturing, subsequent to the utilization of our zero-cost mrna-1273 inventory. research and development expenses research and development expenses increased by $874.0 million, or 176% in 2020. the increase was primarily attributable to an increase in clinical trial expenses of $321.2 million, an increase in manufacturing expenses of $301.7 million, an increase in personnel related costs of $105.2 million, an increase in technology and facility related expenses of $74.2 million, and an increase in consulting and outside services of $60.7 million. the increase in 2020 was largely attributable to mrna-1273 clinical development and pre-launch inventory buildup prior to the authorization from the fda. the increase in personnel related costs was primarily driven by an increase in the number of employees supporting our mrna-1273 development activities as well as other research and development programs. research and development expenses increased by $42.2 million, or 9% in 2019. the increase was primarily attributable to an increase in personnel related costs of $37.4 million, an increase in clinical trial and manufacturing costs of $16.9 million, and an increase in stock-based compensation of $10.6 million. the increases were partially offset by a decrease in in-licensing costs of $22.0 million related to in-licensing agreements executed in 2017 with cellscript, llc and its affiliate mrna ribotherapeutics, inc. (cellscript) to sublicense certain patent rights, and a decrease in lab supplies and materials of $8.2 million. the increases in personnel related costs and stock-based compensation were largely driven by an increase in the number of employees supporting our research and development programs. the in-licensing costs decreased in 2019 as the sublicense grant fees were fully recognized at the end of 2018. we expect that research and development expenses will increase as we continue to progress mrna-1273 through the development process toward a bla approval and indication expansion during the current pandemic, and continue to develop our pipeline and advance our product candidates into later-stage development. in addition, we also expect to incur significant costs related to the development of new generations of our covid-19 vaccine designed to address new variants of the virus. selling, general and administrative expenses selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $78.6 million, or 72% in 2020. the increase was mainly due to an increase in personnel related costs of $30.9 million, an increase in consulting and outside services of $26.9 million, and an increase in legal and other licensing expenses of $14.2 million. the increases in personnel costs and consulting and outside services were primarily attributable to increased headcount and mrna-1273 vaccine candidate commercialization-related activities. general and administrative expenses increased by $15.4 million, or 16% in 2019. the increase was primarily due to an increase in insurance costs of $5.2 million, an increase in consulting and outside services of $4.9 million, an increase in information technology and facility-related costs of $4.0 million and an increase in personnel related costs of $2.5 million. the increases in insurance costs, consulting and outside services and personnel related costs were primarily driven by an increase in the number of employees and costs in support of being a publicly traded company. we expect that selling, general and administrative expenses will increase in 2021 as compared to 2020 as we continue to expand the number of programs and our business operations, and continue to build out our global commercial, regulatory, sales and marketing infrastructure to support the commercialization of our covid-19 vaccine. interest income interest income generated from our investments in marketable securities decreased by $13.8 million, or 36%, in 2020, mainly attributable to an overall lower interest rate. interest income generated from our investments in marketable securities increased by $11.5 million, or 43%, in 2019, mainly driven by a higher weighted average balance of cash and investments, primarily from the net proceeds of our ipo. other (expense) income, net the following tables summarizes other (expense) income, net for each period presented (in thousands): years ended december 31,change 2020 vs. 2019 20202019change% gain on investments$1,301 $323 $978 303 % interest expense (9,886)(6,612)(3,274)50 % other income (expense), net2,501 (1,237)3,738 (302)% total other expense, net$(6,084)$(7,526)$1,442 (19)% years ended december 31,change 2019 vs. 2018 20192018change% gain on investments$323 $31 $292 942 % interest expense (6,612)(3,096)(3,516)114 % other (expense) income, net(1,237)4,900 (6,137)(125)% total other (expense) income, net$(7,526)$1,835 $(9,361)(510)% total other expense, net decreased by $1.4 million, or 19% in 2020. the decrease was primarily due to an increase in foreign currency gains and a reclassification of other income in 2020, offset by a higher interest expense driven by a new finance lease commenced in 2020 for a laboratory and office space, moderna technology center north (mtc north). please refer to note 11 to our consolidated financial statements. total other expense, net increased by $9.4 million in 2019. the increase was mainly attributable to a one-time $7.0 million cash receipt in 2018 as consideration for the waiver of a third party's previously negotiated commitment, and higher interest expense in 2019 of $3.5 million related to our financing lease liabilities. we started recording the interest expense in july 2018 upon the completion of our moderna technology center manufacturing facility, or mtc south. please refer to note 11 to our consolidated financial statements. provision for (benefit from) income taxes there was a tax provision of $2.5 million in 2020, primarily related to foreign income taxes. there were no significant income tax benefits or provisions in 2019 and 2018. liquidity and capital resources we have historically funded our operations primarily from the sale of equity instruments and from proceeds from certain strategic alliance arrangements and grant agreements. during 2020, we entered into supply agreements with the u.s. government and several governmental agencies outside the united states for the supply of mrna-1273, our covid-19 vaccine, and received upfront deposits of $2.92 billion, of which $82.1 million was recognized as product sales. in addition, we raised $1.85 billion in total through two public equity offerings in 2020. as of december 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and investments of $5.25 billion. cash, cash equivalents and investments are invested in accordance with our investment policy, primarily with a view to liquidity and capital preservation. investments, consisting primarily of government and corporate debt securities are stated at fair value. as of december 31, 2020, we had current and non-current investments of approximately $1.98 billion and $0.64 billion, respectively. we began construction of our mtc south facility, in the second half of 2016 and completed construction in 2019. in the second quarter of 2019, we entered into an additional lease for office and laboratory space nearby for our mtc north facility and construction on this facility began in 2019, and is continuing. our capital expenditures related to our mtc facilities were $46.6 million, $3.9 million and $86.5 million for the years ended december 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. cash disbursements related to our mtc facilities were $41.7 million, $14.6 million and $94.5 million for the years ended december 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. on january 30, 2018 and february 15, 2018, we issued series g preferred stock for total gross proceeds of $560.0 million. on may 7, 2018, we issued series h preferred stock for gross proceeds of $125.0 million of which $13.0 million was determined to be a premium and recorded to deferred revenue as part of the merck pcv/sav agreement executed contemporaneously with our series h redeemable convertible preferred stock issuance. on december 11, 2018, we closed our ipo, whereby we sold 26,275,993 shares of common stock at a price of $23.00 per share. the shares began trading on the nasdaq global select market on december 7, 2018. the aggregate net proceeds received by us from the ipo were $563.0 million, net of underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses. in february 2020, we completed a public equity offering of 30,263,158 shares of common stock, including exercise of the underwriters' option over-allotment option, at a price of $19.00 per share. the aggregate net proceeds from the offering were $549.5 million, net of underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses. in may 2020, we completed a public equity offering of 17,600,000 shares of common stock, at a price of $76.00 per share. the aggregate net proceeds from the offering were $1.30 billion, net of underwriting discounts, commission and offering expenses. we have used and intend to use the net proceeds from these equity offerings: (i) to fund working capital needs (raw materials, labor and capital equipment purchases) related to the manufacturing of mrna-1273 for distribution in the united states and outside the united states, assuming necessary regulatory approvals are obtained and the remainder, if any, (ii) to fund clinical development and drug discovery in existing and new therapeutic areas, (iii) to fund further development of our mrna technology platform and the creation of new modalities, or (iv) to fund working capital and other general corporate purposes. cash flow the following table summarizes the primary sources and uses of cash for each period presented (in thousands): years ended december 31, 202020192018 net cash provided by (used in): operating activities $2,026,971 $(458,968)$(330,865) investing activities (1,671,928)(14,945)(373,094) financing activities 2,033,193 51,121 1,226,842 net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents$2,388,236 $(422,792)$522,883 operating activities we derive cash flows from operations primarily from cash collected from customer deposits related to our covid-19 vaccine supply agreements as well as certain government-sponsored and private organizations and strategic alliances. our cash flows from operating activities are significantly affected by our use of cash for operating expenses and working capital to support the business. prior to 2020, we have historically experienced negative cash flows from operating activities as we have invested in our mrna technologies, development pipeline, digital infrastructure, manufacturing technology, and infrastructure. net cash provided by operating activities in 2020 was $2.03 billion and consisted of net loss of $747.1 million less non-cash adjustments of $197.0 million, plus a net change in assets and liabilities of $2.58 billion. non-cash items primarily included stock-based compensation of $93.0 million, leased assets expensed of $62.3 million, depreciation and amortization of $31.3 million, and amortization of investment premiums and discounts of $10.2 million. the net change in assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase in deferred revenue of $3.84 billion, an increase in accrued liabilities of $388.4 million, an increase in accounts payable of $11.9 million, and an increase in operating lease liabilities of $11.8 million, partially offset by an increase in accounts receivable of $1.39 billion, an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets of $241.0 million, an increase of inventory of $46.5 million, and an increase in operating lease right-of-use assets of $10.5 million. net cash used in operating activities in 2019 was $459.0 million and consisted of net loss of $514.0 million less non-cash adjustments of $108.7 million, plus a net change in assets and liabilities of $53.7 million. non-cash items primarily included stock-based compensation of $81.1 million, depreciation and amortization of $31.0 million, and amortization of investment premiums and discounts of $3.7 million. the net change in assets and liabilities was primarily due to a decrease in deferred revenue of $44.1 million, a decrease in accounts payable of $24.0 million, a decrease in other liabilities of $6.2 million, an increase in right-of-use assets, operating leases of $5.7 million and an decrease in accrued liabilities of $3.4 million, partially offset by an increase in operating lease liabilities, non-current of $12.6 million, a decrease in prepaid expenses and other assets of $9.8 million and a decrease in accounts receivable of $6.7 million. net cash used in operating activities in 2018 was $330.9 million and consisted of net loss of $384.7 million less non-cash adjustments of $96.5 million, plus a net change in assets and liabilities of $42.6 million. non-cash items primarily included stock-based compensation of $72.6 million and depreciation and amortization of $24.9 million. the net change in assets and liabilities was primarily due to a decrease in deferred revenue of $65.3 million, and an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets of $5.3 million, partially offset by an increase in accounts payable of $15.0 million and an increase in accrued liabilities of $8.8 million. investing activities our primary investing activities consist of purchases, sales, and maturities of our investments and capital expenditures for manufacturing, laboratory, computer equipment, and software. net cash used in investing activities in 2020 was $1.67 billion, which included purchases of marketable securities of $2.96 billion and purchases of property and equipment of $67.4 million, partially offset by proceeds from maturities of marketable securities of $1.14 billion and proceeds from sales of marketable securities of $214.7 million. net cash used in investing activities in 2019 was $14.9 million, which included purchases of marketable securities of $1.15 billion and purchases of property and equipment of $31.6 million, partially offset by proceeds from maturities of marketable securities of $993.2 million and proceeds from sales of marketable securities of $168.7 million. net cash used in investing activities in 2018 was $373.1 million, which included purchases of marketable securities of $1.23 billion and purchases of property and equipment of $105.8 million, partially offset by proceeds from maturities of marketable securities of $783.4 million and proceeds from sales of marketable securities of $177.0 million. financing activities we generated cash from financing activities of $2.03 billion in 2020, primarily from net proceeds from equity offerings of $1.85 billion, net proceeds from the issuance of common stock through our equity plans of $179.6 million, and proceeds from the purchase of common stock under our employee stock purchase plan of $7.0 million. we generated cash from financing activities of $51.1 million in 2019, primarily from net proceeds from the issuance of common stock under our equity plans of $47.3 million, and net proceeds from the purchase of common stock from our employee stock purchase plan of $2.9 million. we generated cash from financing activities of $1.23 billion in 2018, primarily from net proceeds from the issuance of redeemable convertible preferred stock of $661.1 million and net proceeds from the issuance of common stock of $563.0 million in connection with our ipo. operation and funding requirements since our inception, we have incurred significant losses and negative cash flows from operations due to our significant research and development expenses. we have an accumulated deficit of $2.24 billion and $1.50 billion as of december 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. we expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we continue research and development of our development candidates and clinical activities for our investigational medicines. we also expect our expenses to increase associated with manufacturing costs, including our arrangements with our international supply and manufacturing partners. our ongoing work on mrna-1273 will require significant cash outflows during 2021, most of which may not be reimbursed or otherwise paid for by our partners or collaborators. we believe that our cash, cash equivalents, and investments as of december 31, 2020, will be sufficient to enable us to fund our projected operations through at least the next 12 months from the issuance of our financial statements. we are subject to all the risks related to the development and commercialization of novel medicines, and we may encounter unforeseen expenses, difficulties, complications, delays, and other unknown factors including expenses related to the ongoing coronavirus pandemic, which may adversely affect our business. our forecast of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement and involves risks and uncertainties, and actual results could vary as a result of a number of factors. we have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. if we fail to become profitable or are unable to sustain profitability on a continuing basis, we may be required to finance future cash needs through a combination of public or private equity offerings, structured financings and debt financings, government funding arrangements, potential future strategic alliances from which we receive upfront fees, milestone payments, and other forms of consideration, and marketing, manufacturing, distribution and licensing arrangements. if we are required to finance future cash needs, additional capital may not be available on reasonable terms, if at all. if we are unable to raise additional capital in sufficient amounts or on terms acceptable to us, we may have to significantly delay, scale back, or discontinue the development or commercialization of one or more of our investigational medicines, or slow down or cease work on one or more of our programs. if we raise additional funds through the issuance of additional equity or debt securities, it could result in dilution to our existing stockholders or increased fixed payment obligations, and any such securities may have rights senior to those of our common stock. if we incur indebtedness, we could become subject to covenants that would restrict our operations and potentially impair our competitiveness, such as limitations on our ability to incur additional debt, limitations on our ability to acquire, sell or license intellectual property rights and other operating restrictions that could adversely impact our ability to conduct our business. if we raise funds through strategic alliances or marketing, distribution, or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs, or investigational medicines or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. any of these events could significantly harm our business, financial condition, and prospects. off balance sheet arrangements as of december 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in item 303(a)(4)(ii) of regulation s-k. contractual obligations and commitments the following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of december 31, 2020 and the effects that such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods (in thousands): payments due by period totalless than 1 year 1 - 3 years3 - 5 yearsmore than 5 years operating leases (1) $173,747 $15,492 $31,921 $32,735 $93,599 financing leases (1) 513,312 36,579 23,902 24,772 428,059 purchase obligations (2) 686,472 677,539 8,855 78 — total contractual cash obligations (1) $1,373,531 $729,610 $64,678 $57,585 $521,658 _______ (1)the amounts in the table include a total payment of $338.9 million associated with our mtc south and mtc north leases for the optional lease extension periods. for accounting purpose, a lease term is the non-cancelable period of the lease and includes options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain that an option will be exercised. please refer to note 11 to our consolidated financial statements. (2)the amounts represent non-cancelable fixed payment obligations related to purchases of raw materials, contract manufacturing services, clinical services and other goods or services in the normal course of business. under our strategic collaboration agreements, we are committed to perform certain research, development, and manufacturing activities. as part of our personalized mrna cancer vaccines, or pcv, collaboration and license agreement with merck, we are committed to perform certain research, development, and manufacturing activities related to pcv products through an initial phase 2 clinical trial up to a budgeted amount of $243.0 million as of december 31, 2020. please refer to note 5 to the consolidated financial statements. the expenses we expect to incur as part of our commitments under the pcv and other collaboration agreements were not included in the above table as we are not able to determine the timing and amounts of such expenses. we have agreements with certain vendors for various services, including services related to clinical operations and support and contract manufacturing, which we are not contractually able to terminate for convenience. certain agreements provide for termination rights subject to termination fees or wind down costs. under such agreements, we are contractually obligated to make certain payments to vendors, mainly to reimburse them for their unrecoverable outlays incurred prior to cancellation. the exact amounts of such obligations are dependent on the timing of termination, and the exact terms of the relevant agreement and cannot be reasonably estimated. at december 31, 2020, we had cancelable open purchase orders of $896.9 million in total under such agreements for our clinical operations and support and contract manufacturing. these amounts represent only our estimate of those items for which we had a contractual commitment to pay at december 31, 2020, assuming we would not cancel these agreements. the actual amounts we pay in the future to the vendors under such agreements may differ from the cancelable open purchase order amounts of $896.9 million. in addition to the above obligations, we enter into a variety of agreements and financial commitments in the normal course of business. the terms generally allow us the option to cancel, reschedule, and adjust our requirements based on our business needs, prior to the delivery of goods or performance of services. it is not possible to predict the maximum potential amount of future payments under these agreements due to the conditional nature of our obligations and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each particular agreement.