management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations in the annual report for additional discussion of the composition of our investment portfolio as of december 31, 2019, and of the market risks associated with our investment portfolio. the elimination of or change in the london interbank offered rate (libor) may adversely affect the interest rates on and value of certain floating rate securities and other instruments that we hold. libor is a common benchmark interest rate (or reference rate) used to set and make adjustments to interest rates for certain floating rate securities and other financial instruments. published reports have indicated that regulatory authorities and/or financial institutions may change how libor is calculated or discontinue its calculation and publication after 2021. alternative reference rates have been developed, including the federal reserve bank of new york’s secured overnight financing rate (sofr), but the acceptance of such alternative rates and their applicability to existing instruments is uncertain. if libor ceases to exist or if the methods of calculating libor change from current methods for any reason, outstanding securities with interest rates tied to libor may be adversely affected if those securities either do not provide for the automatic substitution of another reference rate or convert to another reference rate or a fixed rate that could be less favorable to us. outstanding securities and contracts that could be affected include certain preferred stocks and other floating rate securities, fixed rate securities that may convert to libor-based floating rate instruments in the future, certain derivatives, and any other assets or liabilities whose value is tied to libor. any uncertainty regarding the continued use and reliability of libor as a benchmark interest rate could also adversely affect the value of those instruments. iv. liquidity risk the inability to access our cash accounts or to convert investments into cash on favorable terms when we desire to do so may materially and adversely affect our business. we rely on our ability to access our cash accounts at banks and other financial institutions to operate our business. if we are unable to access the cash in those accounts as needed, whether due to our own systems difficulties, an institution-specific issue at the bank or financial institution (such as a cybersecurity breach), a broader disruption in banking, financial or wire transfer systems, or otherwise, our ability to pay insurance claims and other financial obligations when due and otherwise operate our business could be materially adversely affected. likewise, our investment portfolios are subject to risks inherent in the nation’s and world’s capital markets. any disruption in the functioning of those markets or in our ability to liquidate investments or specific categories of investments on favorable terms when desired, could impair our ability to pay claims or other financial obligations when due. any such event or series of such events could result in significant operational difficulties, reputational harm and adverse actions by regulators and have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, cash flows, and results of operations. v.credit and other financial risks our financial condition may be adversely affected if one or more parties with which we enter into significant contracts or transact business (including under certain government programs) become insolvent, experience other financial difficulties, or default in the performance of contractual or reimbursement obligations. our business is dependent on the performance by third parties of their responsibilities under various contractual or service arrangements and government programs. these include, for example, agreements with other insurance carriers to sell their products to our customers in bundled packages or otherwise, arrangements for transferring certain of our risks (including reinsurance arrangements used by us, our corporate insurance policies, and the performance of state reinsurance facilities/associations), and reimbursement obligations under various state or federal programs, such as the michigan catastrophic claims association or the national flood insurance program. in addition, from time to time, we enter into significant financial transactions, such as derivative instruments, with major banks, other financial institutions, or security clearinghouses. if one or more of these parties were to default in the performance of their obligations under their respective contracts or programs or determine to abandon or terminate support for a system, product, obligation, or service that is significant to our business, we could suffer significant financial losses or other problems, which in turn could materially adversely affect our financial condition, cash flows, or results of operations and cause damage to our brand and reputation. our insurance subsidiaries may be limited in the amount of dividends that they can pay, which in turn may limit our ability to repay indebtedness, make capital contributions to other subsidiaries or affiliates, pay dividends to shareholders, repurchase securities, or meet other obligations. the progressive corporation is a holding company with no business operations of its own. consequently, if its subsidiaries are unable to pay dividends or make other distributions, or are able to pay only limited amounts, the progressive corporation may be unable to make payments on its indebtedness, make capital contributions to or otherwise fund its subsidiaries or affiliates, - 20 - pay dividends to its shareholders, or meet its other obligations. each insurance subsidiary’s ability to pay dividends may be limited by one or more of the following factors: insurance regulatory authorities require insurance companies to maintain specified minimum levels of statutory capital and surplus insurance regulations restrict the amounts available for distribution based on either net income or surplus of the insurance company competitive pressures require our insurance subsidiaries to maintain high financial strength ratings, and in certain jurisdictions, prior approval must be obtained from regulatory authorities for the insurance subsidiaries to pay dividends or make other distributions to affiliated entities, including the parent holding company. in addition, under the arx stockholders’ agreement, arx cannot pay a dividend without the consent of progressive and another specified arx stockholder. the terms of our outstanding preferred shares prohibit us from paying a dividend on our common shares in certain circumstances. the terms of our outstanding preferred shares prohibit us from declaring or paying dividends or distributions on our common shares while our preferred shares are outstanding, unless all accrued and unpaid dividends on the preferred shares, including the full dividends for all current dividend periods, have been declared and paid or a sum sufficient for payment thereof set apart, subject to certain exceptions. if we are unable to obtain capital when necessary to support our business, our financial condition and our ability to grow could be materially adversely affected. we may need to acquire additional capital from time to time as a result of many factors. these could include increased regulatory requirements, losses in our insurance or investment operations, or significant growth in the insurance premiums that we write, among others. if we are unable to obtain capital at favorable rates when needed, whether due to our results, volatility or disruptions in debt and equity markets beyond our control, or other reasons, our financial condition could be materially adversely affected. in such an event, unless and until additional sources of capital are secured, we may be limited in our ability, or unable, to service our debt obligations, pay dividends, grow our business, pay our other obligations when due or engage in other corporate transactions. such a deterioration of our financial condition could adversely affect the perception of our company by insurance regulators, potentially resulting in regulatory actions, and the price of our equity or debt securities could fall significantly. our access to capital markets, ability to obtain or renew financing arrangements, obligations to post collateral under certain derivative contracts, and business operations are dependent on favorable evaluations and ratings by credit and other rating agencies. our credit and financial strength are evaluated and rated by various rating agencies, such as standard & poor’s, moody’s investors service, fitch ratings, and a.m. best. downgrades in our credit ratings could adversely affect our ability to access the capital markets and/or lead to increased borrowing costs in the future (although the interest rates we pay on our current indebtedness would not be affected), as would adverse recommendations by equity analysts at the various brokerage houses and investment firms. perceptions of our company by other businesses and consumers could also be significantly impaired. in addition, a downgrade could trigger contractual obligations in certain derivative transactions requiring us to post substantial amounts of additional collateral or allow a third party to liquidate the derivative transaction. downgrades in the ratings of our insurance subsidiaries could likewise negatively impact our operations, potentially resulting in lower or negative premium growth. in any such event, our financial performance could be materially adversely affected. - 21 - our dividend policy may result in varying amounts being paid to our common shareholders, or no payment in some periods, and the dividend policy ultimately may be changed in the discretion of the board of directors. we have announced our intention to pay a dividend on our common shares on a quarterly basis and to consider paying a variable dividend on at least an annual basis. the amount of dividends, if any, may vary, perhaps significantly, from the amounts paid in preceding periods. in addition, the board retains the discretion to alter our policy or not to pay such dividends at any time. such an action by the board could result from, among other reasons, changes in the insurance marketplace, changes in our performance or capital needs, changes in u.s. federal income tax laws, disruptions of national or international capital markets, or other events affecting our liquidity, financial position or prospects, as described above. any such change could adversely affect investors’ perceptions of the company and the value of, or the total return of an investment in, our common shares. our investments in certain tax-advantaged projects may not generate the anticipated tax benefits and related returns. we may invest in certain projects that we believe are entitled to tax-advantaged treatment under applicable federal or state law, including renewable energy development, historic property rehabilitation, and affordable housing, and we may make other tax-advantaged investments from time to time. our investments in these projects are designed to generate a return through the realization of tax credits and, in some cases, through other tax benefits and cash flows from the project. these investments are subject to the risk that the underlying tax credits and related benefits may not be valid, and in some cases previously recorded tax credits can be challenged or are subject to recapture by the applicable taxing authorities if specific requirements are not satisfied. many of the factors that could lead to the invalidity, challenge, or recapture of tax credits are beyond our control. the inability to realize these tax credits and other tax benefits could have a material adverse impact on our financial condition. we do not manage to short-term earnings expectations; our goal is to maximize the long-term value of the enterprise, which, at times, may adversely affect short-term results. we believe that shareholder value will be increased in the long run if we meet or exceed the financial goals and policies that we establish each year. we do not manage our business to maximize short-term stock performance or the amount of any dividend that may be paid. we report earnings and other operating results on a monthly basis. we do not provide earnings estimates to the market and do not comment on earnings estimates by analysts. as a result, our reported results for a particular period may vary, perhaps significantly, from investors’ expectations, which could result in significant volatility in the price of our equity or debt securities. our property business may cause additional volatility in our consolidated results. in addition, due to our focus on the long-term value of the enterprise, we may undertake business strategies and establish related financial goals for a specific year that are designed to enhance our longer-term performance, while understanding that such strategies may not always similarly benefit short-term results, such as our annual underwriting profit or earnings per share. consequently, these strategies may adversely affect short-term performance or the payment of dividends, and may result in additional volatility in the price of our equity or debt securities. - 22 - item 1b. unresolved staff comments