management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations in the annual report for additional discussion of the composition of our investment portfolio as of december 31, 2020, and of the market risks associated with our investment portfolio. the elimination of or change in the london interbank offered rate (libor) may adversely affect the interest rates on and value of certain floating rate securities and other instruments that we hold. libor is a common benchmark interest rate (or reference rate) used to set and make adjustments to interest rates for certain floating rate securities and other financial instruments. published reports have indicated that regulatory authorities and/or financial institutions may change how libor is calculated or discontinue its calculation and publication after 2021. alternative reference rates have been developed, including the federal reserve bank of new york’s secured overnight financing rate (sofr), but the acceptance of such alternative rates and their applicability to existing instruments is uncertain. if libor ceases to exist or if the methods of calculating libor change from current methods for any reason, outstanding securities with interest rates tied to libor may be adversely affected if those securities either do not provide for the automatic substitution of another reference rate or convert to another reference rate or a fixed rate that could be less favorable to us. outstanding securities and contracts that could be affected include certain preferred stocks and other floating rate securities, fixed rate securities that may convert to libor-based floating rate instruments in the future, certain derivatives, and any other assets or liabilities whose value is tied to libor. any uncertainty regarding the continued use and reliability of libor as a benchmark interest rate could also adversely affect the value of those instruments. - 21 - v.liquidity risk the inability to access our cash accounts or to convert investments into cash on favorable terms when we desire to do so may materially and adversely affect our business. we rely on our ability to access our cash accounts at banks and other financial institutions to operate our business. if we are unable to access the cash in those accounts as needed, whether due to our own systems difficulties, an institution-specific issue at the bank or financial institution (such as a cybersecurity breach), a broader disruption in banking, financial or wire transfer systems, or otherwise, our ability to pay insurance claims and other financial obligations when due and otherwise operate our business could be materially adversely affected. likewise, our investment portfolios are subject to risks inherent in the nation’s and world’s capital markets. any disruption in the functioning of those markets or in our ability to liquidate investments or specific categories of investments on favorable terms when desired, could impair our ability to pay claims or other financial obligations when due. any such event or series of such events could result in significant operational difficulties, reputational harm and adverse actions by regulators and have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, cash flows, and results of operations. vi. credit and other financial risks our financial condition may be adversely affected if one or more parties with which we enter into significant contracts or transact business (including under certain government programs) become insolvent, experience other financial difficulties, or default in the performance of contractual or reimbursement obligations. our business is dependent on the performance by third parties of their responsibilities under various contractual or service arrangements and government programs. these include, for example, agreements with other insurance carriers to sell their products to our customers in bundled packages or otherwise, arrangements for transferring certain of our risks (including reinsurance arrangements used by us, our corporate insurance policies, and the performance of state reinsurance facilities/associations), and reimbursement obligations under various state or federal programs, such as the michigan catastrophic claims association or the national flood insurance program. in addition, from time to time, we enter into significant financial transactions, such as derivative instruments, with major banks, other financial institutions, or security clearinghouses. if one or more of these parties were to default in the performance of their obligations under their respective contracts or programs or determine to abandon or terminate support for a system, product, obligation, or service that is significant to our business, we could suffer significant financial losses or other problems, which in turn could materially adversely affect our financial condition, cash flows, or results of operations and cause damage to our brand and reputation. our insurance subsidiaries may be limited in the amount of dividends that they can pay, which in turn may limit our ability to repay indebtedness, make capital contributions to other subsidiaries or affiliates, pay dividends to shareholders, repurchase securities, or meet other obligations. the progressive corporation is a holding company with no business operations of its own. consequently, if its subsidiaries are unable to pay dividends or make other distributions, or are able to pay only limited amounts, the progressive corporation may be unable to make payments on its indebtedness, make capital contributions to or otherwise fund its subsidiaries or affiliates, pay dividends to its shareholders, or meet its other obligations. each insurance subsidiary’s ability to pay dividends may be limited by one or more of the following factors: • insurance regulatory authorities require insurance companies to maintain specified minimum levels of statutory capital and surplus • insurance regulations restrict the amounts available for distribution based on either net income or surplus of the insurance company • competitive pressures require our insurance subsidiaries to maintain high financial strength ratings, and • in certain jurisdictions, prior approval must be obtained from regulatory authorities for the insurance subsidiaries to pay dividends or make other distributions to affiliated entities, including the parent holding company. the terms of our outstanding preferred shares prohibit us from paying a dividend on our common shares in certain circumstances. the terms of our outstanding preferred shares prohibit us from declaring or paying dividends or distributions on our common shares while our preferred shares are outstanding, unless all accrued and unpaid dividends on the preferred shares, including the full dividends for all current dividend periods, have been declared and paid or a sum sufficient for payment thereof set apart, subject to certain exceptions. - 22 - if we are unable to obtain capital when necessary to support our business, our financial condition and our ability to grow could be materially adversely affected. we may need to acquire additional capital from time to time as a result of many factors. these could include increased regulatory requirements, losses in our insurance or investment operations, or significant growth in the insurance premiums that we write, among others. if we are unable to obtain capital at favorable rates when needed, whether due to our results, volatility or disruptions in debt and equity markets beyond our control, or other reasons, our financial condition could be materially adversely affected. in such an event, unless and until additional sources of capital are secured, we may be limited in our ability, or unable, to service our debt obligations, pay dividends, grow our business, pay our other obligations when due or engage in other corporate transactions. such a deterioration of our financial condition could adversely affect the perception of our company by insurance regulators, potentially resulting in regulatory actions, and the price of our equity or debt securities could fall significantly. our access to capital markets, ability to obtain or renew financing arrangements, obligations to post collateral under certain derivative contracts, and business operations are dependent on favorable evaluations and ratings by credit and other rating agencies. our credit and financial strength are evaluated and rated by various rating agencies, such as standard & poor’s, moody’s investors service, fitch ratings, and a.m. best. downgrades in our credit ratings could adversely affect our ability to access the capital markets and/or lead to increased borrowing costs in the future (although the interest rates we pay on our current indebtedness would not be affected), as would adverse recommendations by equity analysts at the various brokerage houses and investment firms. perceptions of our company by other businesses and consumers could also be significantly impaired. in addition, from time to time we may enter into certain derivative transactions providing that a downgrade could trigger contractual obligations requiring us to post substantial amounts of additional collateral or allow a third party to liquidate the derivative transaction. downgrades in the ratings of our insurance subsidiaries could likewise negatively impact our operations, potentially resulting in lower or negative premium growth. in any such event, our financial performance could be materially adversely affected. our dividend policy may result in varying amounts being paid to our common shareholders, or no payment in some periods, and the dividend policy ultimately may be changed in the discretion of the board of directors. we have announced our intention to pay a dividend on our common shares on a quarterly basis and to consider paying a variable dividend on at least an annual basis. the frequency and amount of dividends, if any, may vary, perhaps significantly, from the amounts paid in preceding periods. in addition, the board retains the discretion to alter our policy or not to pay such dividends at any time. such an action by the board could result from, among other reasons, changes in the insurance marketplace, changes in our performance or capital needs, changes in u.s. federal income tax laws, disruptions of national or international capital markets, or other events affecting our liquidity, financial position or prospects, as described above. any such change could adversely affect investors’ perceptions of the company and the value of, or the total return of an investment in, our common shares. our investments in certain tax-advantaged projects may not generate the anticipated tax benefits and related returns. we may invest in certain projects that we believe are entitled to tax-advantaged treatment under applicable federal or state law, including renewable energy development, historic property rehabilitation, and affordable housing, and we may make other tax-advantaged investments from time to time. our investments in these projects are designed to generate a return through the realization of tax credits and, in some cases, through other tax benefits and cash flows from the project. these investments are subject to the risk that the underlying tax credits and related benefits may not be valid, and in some cases previously recorded tax credits can be challenged or are subject to recapture by the applicable taxing authorities if specific requirements are not satisfied. many of the factors that could lead to the invalidity, challenge, or recapture of tax credits are beyond our control. the inability to realize these tax credits and other tax benefits could have a material adverse impact on our financial condition. - 23 - vii. general the outbreak of the novel coronavirus, or covid-19, and the restrictions put in place to help slow and/or stop the spread of the virus, could materially adversely affect our business and results of operations. the spread of covid-19 throughout the united states and the international community has had, and could continue to have, a negative impact on financial markets, general economic conditions, and certain of our businesses. depending on the duration and severity of the coronavirus pandemic, our businesses, our operations and our financial results could be negatively impacted in a number of ways, including, but not limited to, the following: • demand for our insurance products and our premium revenue could be reduced, perhaps significantly, if customers drive less or are unable to afford insurance, insurance shopping patterns are disrupted, vehicle and home purchases are curtailed, small businesses suspend or discontinue operations, the usage of transportation network company businesses continues to be below historic levels, insurance agencies are unable or unwilling to write business, or our competitors offer products or benefits more appealing to customers or agents or more responsive to their needs, among other factors • our ability to price our products accurately for new and renewal policies could be negatively impacted, as could our ability to respond effectively to the initiatives of our competitors • claims trends could become more volatile, inflation rates could diverge significantly from our expectations, vehicle and home repair industries could be significantly disrupted, and the availability of medical resources could be limited, potentially resulting in higher claims severity and increased costs to resolve claims • our ability to resolve claims accurately and efficiently and establish accurate loss reserves could be impaired if we are unable to staff our claims group appropriately • legislative or regulatory actions, or court decisions, could impact our business in unexpected ways, including, without limitation, by: requiring us to change the way we price, segment, underwrite, or select risks to insure; altering our rights and obligations under our issued policies; or imposing payment obligations on us and other insurers in our industry for losses and costs that otherwise would be uninsured • the cumulative costs required by such governmental actions, or of actions taken voluntarily by us to accommodate the needs of customers, including, but not limited to, providing credits or other payments to policyholders and billing leniency efforts, such as providing relief from policy cancellations or non-renewals, and related debt write offs, could be substantial • unexpected changes in consumer behavior or market conditions, as well as deteriorating economic conditions, may reduce the effectiveness of our advertising • illnesses suffered by key employees could prevent or delay the performance of critical business and financial reporting functions; widespread illnesses suffered by our employees may render us unable to perform normal business functions and operate our business on a day-to-day basis • the continued functioning of our data centers and important information technology and communication systems, as well as the continued performance of and our accessibility to the systems of our various vendors, could be imperiled by widespread illnesses, illnesses suffered by key technology personnel, or work limitations or other governmental mandates • our business continuity plans may prove inadequate to address the business challenges that we confront as these issues develop • our vendors and counterparties to various contracts, including key vendors for our insurance, claims and technology operations, reinsurance arrangements and financial counterparties, may not be able to perform or pay the obligations required of them on a timely basis, or at all, due to key employee illnesses, widespread illnesses or other challenges that they face arising directly or indirectly from the coronavirus pandemic the potential effects of covid-19 also could exacerbate the impacts of many of the other risk factors, including, but not limited to: litigation claims being brought against the company; data security breaches and cyber attacks in the work-from-home environment; the valuation, volatility, and liquidity of our debt and equity investment portfolios; the condition of domestic and global economies and financial markets; our ability to access capital markets at favorable rates, if needed; our ability to access our cash accounts at banks and other financial institutions to operate our business; and the need to take impairments of goodwill or certain intangible assets. - 24 - our goal is to maximize the long-term value of the enterprise and we do not manage to short-term earnings expectations, which may adversely affect short-term results. we believe that shareholder value will be increased in the long run if we meet or exceed the financial goals and policies that we establish each year. we do not manage our business to maximize short-term stock performance or the amount of any dividend that may be paid. we report earnings and other operating results on a monthly basis. we do not provide earnings estimates to the market and do not comment on earnings estimates by analysts. as a result, our reported results for a particular period may vary, perhaps significantly, from investors’ expectations, which could result in significant volatility in the price of our equity or debt securities. our property business may cause additional volatility in our consolidated results. in addition, due to our focus on the long-term value of the enterprise, we may undertake business decisions and strategies and establish related financial goals that are designed to enhance our longer-term performance and value, while understanding that such decisions and strategies may not always similarly benefit short-term results, such as our annual underwriting profit, dividend payouts, or earnings per share. similar tradeoffs may be involved in our consideration of the interests of other stakeholders, including our employees, customers, agents, suppliers, and communities, as well as whether and how we respond to or address corporate environmental and social responsibility initiatives and other public policy matters that impact us. also, social responsibility and public policy considerations are a fast-evolving area and determining appropriate responses and actions can be uncertain. depending on how observers view our responses or our commitment to addressing such matters, we could be subject to criticism, adverse publicity, or campaigns by investors, activists, or others. consequently, such factors and the related tradeoffs may adversely affect our financial performance or the market prices of our equity or debt securities. - 25 - item 1b. unresolved staff comments