item 7. management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations this form 10-k contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of section 27a of the securities act of 1933 and section 21e of the securities exchange act of 1934, including statements that involve expectations, plans, or intentions (such as those relating to future business, future results of operations or financial condition, new or planned features or services, mergers or acquisitions, or management strategies). additionally, our forward-looking statements include expectations related to anticipated impacts of the coronavirus pandemic. these forward-looking statements can be identified by words such as “may,” “will,” “would,” “should,” “could,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “intend,” “strategy,” “future,” “opportunity,” “plan,” “project,” “forecast,” and other similar expressions. these forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties that could cause our actual results and financial condition to differ materially from those expressed or implied in our forward-looking statements. such risks and uncertainties include, among others, those discussed in “item 1a. risk factors” of this form 10-k, as well as in our consolidated financial statements, related notes, and the other information appearing in this report and our other filings with the securities and exchange commission (“sec”). we do not intend, and undertake no obligation except as required by law, to update any of our forward-looking statements after the date of this report to reflect actual results or future events or circumstances. given these risks and uncertainties, readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on such forward-looking statements. you should read the following “management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations” in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes that appear in this report. unless otherwise expressly stated or the context otherwise requires, references to “we,” “our,” “us,” “the company,” and “paypal” refer to paypal holdings, inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries. this management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations focuses on discussion of 2021 results as compared to 2020 results. for discussion of 2020 results as compared to 2019 results, see “item 7. management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations” within our form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2020 filed with the sec on february 5, 2021. business environment the company we are a leading technology platform that enables digital payments and simplifies commerce experiences on behalf of merchants and consumers worldwide. paypal is committed to democratizing financial services to help improve the financial health of individuals and to increase economic opportunity for entrepreneurs and businesses of all sizes around the world. our goal is to enable our merchants and consumers to manage and move their money anywhere in the world in the markets we serve, anytime, on any platform, and using any device when sending payments or getting paid, including person-to-person payments. regulatory environment we operate globally and in a rapidly evolving regulatory environment characterized by a heightened focus by regulators globally on all aspects of the payments industry, including countering terrorist financing, anti-money laundering, privacy, cybersecurity, and consumer protection. the laws and regulations applicable to us, including those enacted prior to the advent of digital payments, are continuing to evolve through legislative and regulatory action and judicial interpretation. new or changing laws and regulations, including changes to their interpretation and implementation, as well as increased penalties and enforcement actions related to non-compliance, could have a material adverse impact on our business, results of operations, and financial condition. we monitor these areas closely and are focused on designing compliant solutions for our customers. information security information security risks for global payments and technology companies like us have increased significantly in recent years. although we have developed systems and processes designed to protect the data we manage, prevent data loss and other security incidents and effectively respond to known and potential risks, and expect to continue to expend significant resources to bolster these protections, we remain subject to these risks and there can be no assurance that our security measures will provide sufficient security or prevent breaches or attacks. for additional information regarding our information security risks, see “item 1a. risk factors—cyberattacks and security vulnerabilities could result in serious harm to our reputation, business, and financial condition.” covid-19 the coronavirus (“covid-19”) pandemic has resulted in government authorities and businesses throughout the world implementing numerous measures intended to contain and limit the spread of covid-19, including travel restrictions, border closures, quarantines, shelter-in-place and lock-down orders, mask and social distancing requirements, and business limitations and shutdowns. the spread of covid-19 and increased variants has caused, and may continue to cause us to make significant modifications to our business practices, including enabling most of our workforce to work from home, establishing strict health and safety protocols for our offices, restricting physical participation in meetings, events, and conferences, and imposing restrictions on employee travel. we will continue to actively monitor the situation and may take further actions that alter our business practices as may be required by federal, state, or local authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, or business partners. the spread of covid-19 has also accelerated the shift from in-store shopping and traditional in-store payment methods (e.g., cash) towards e-commerce and digital payments and resulted in increased customer demand for safer payment and delivery solutions (e.g., contactless payment methods, buy online and pick up in store) and significant increases in online spending in certain verticals that have historically had a strong in-store presence. on balance, our business has benefited from these behavioral shifts. to the extent that consumers revert to pre-covid-19 behaviors as the pandemic-related restrictions lessen, our business, financial condition, and results of operations would be adversely impacted. the rapidly changing global market and economic conditions as a result of the covid-19 pandemic have impacted, and are expected to continue to impact, our operations and business. the broader implications of the covid-19 pandemic and related global economic unpredictability on our business, financial condition, and results of operations remain uncertain. for additional information on how the covid-19 pandemic has impacted and could continue to negatively impact our business, see below for specific discussion in the respective areas, and also refer to “part i, item 1a, risk factors” in this form 10-k. brexit the united kingdom (“u.k.”) formally exited the european union (“eu”) and the european economic area (“eea”) on january 31, 2020 (commonly referred to as “brexit”) with the expiration of the transition period on december 31, 2020. paypal (europe) s.à.r.l. et cie, sca (“paypal (europe)”) operates in the u.k. within the scope of its passport permissions (as they stood at the end of the transition period) under the temporary permissions regime pending the grant of new u.k. authorizations by the u.k. financial regulators. we are currently unable to determine the longer-term impact that brexit will have on our business, which will depend, in part, on the implications of new tariff, trade, and regulatory frameworks that now govern the provision of cross-border goods and services between the u.k. and the eea, as well as the financial and operational consequences of the requirement for paypal (europe) to obtain new u.k. authorizations to operate its business longer-term within the u.k. market. for additional information on how brexit could affect our business, see “item 1a. risk factors—brexit: the u.k.'s departure from the eu could harm our business, financial condition, and results of operations.” brexit may contribute to instability in financial, stock, and foreign currency exchange markets, including volatility in the value of the british pound and euro. we have foreign currency exchange exposure management programs designed to help reduce the impact from foreign currency exchange rate movements. the tables below provide the percentage of our total net revenues and gross loans and interest receivable from the u.k. and eu (excluding the u.k.) for the periods presented: 202120202019 net revenues generated from the u.k.9 %11 %11 % net revenues generated from the eu (excluding the u.k.)19 %19 %17 % december 31, 2021december 31, 2020 gross loans and interest receivable due from customers in the u.k.40 %50 % gross loans and interest receivable due from customers in the eu (excluding the u.k.)21 %14 % the change in the percentage of gross loans and interest receivable due from customers in the u.k. and eu year-over-year was primarily attributable to expansion of our installment credit products in the eu. overview of results of operations the following table provides a summary of our consolidated financial results for the years ended december 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019: year ended december 31,percent increase/(decrease) 20212020201920212020 (in millions, except percentages and per share amounts) net revenues$25,371 $21,454 $17,772 18 %21 % operating expenses21,109 18,165 15,053 16 %21 % operating income4,262 3,289 2,719 30 %21 % operating margin17 %15 %15 %**** other income (expense), net(163)1,776 279 (109)%537 % income tax (benefit) expense(70)863 539 (108)%60 % effective tax rate(2)%17 %18 %**** net income$4,169 $4,202 $2,459 (1)%71 % net income per diluted share$3.52 $3.54 $2.07 (1)%71 % net cash provided by operating activities$6,340 $5,854 $4,071 8 %44 % all amounts in tables are rounded to the nearest million, except as otherwise noted. as a result, certain amounts may not recalculate using the rounded amounts provided. ** not meaningful net revenues increased $3.9 billion, or 18%, in 2021 compared to 2020 driven primarily by growth in total payment volume (“tpv”, as defined below under “key metrics”) of 33%. total operating expenses increased $2.9 billion, or 16%, in 2021 compared to 2020 due primarily to an increase in transaction expense, and to a lesser extent, increases in sales and marketing expenses, technology and development expenses, and customer support and operations expenses, partially offset by a decline in transaction and credit losses. operating income increased $973 million, or 30%, in 2021 compared to 2020 due to growth in net revenues, partially offset by an increase in operating expenses. our operating margin was 17% and 15% in 2021 and 2020, respectively. operating margin for 2021 was positively impacted primarily by the decrease in transaction and credit losses. net income decreased by $33 million, or 1%, in 2021 as compared to 2020 due to a decrease in other income (expense), net of $1.9 billion, driven primarily by lower net gains on strategic investments in 2021 compared to the prior year, partially offset by the previously discussed increase in operating income of $973 million and a decrease in income tax expense of $933 million associated with lower net gains on strategic investments, higher benefits associated with stock-based compensation deductions, and lower expense related to intra-group transfers of intellectual property. impact of foreign currency exchange rates we have significant international operations that are denominated in foreign currencies, primarily the british pound, euro, australian dollar, and canadian dollar, subjecting us to foreign currency exchange risk which may adversely impact our financial results. the strengthening or weakening of the united states (“u.s.”) dollar versus the british pound, euro, australian dollar, and canadian dollar, as well as other currencies in which we conduct our international operations, impacts the translation of our net revenues and expenses generated in these foreign currencies into the u.s. dollar. in 2021, 2020, and 2019, we generated approximately 46%, 49%, and 47% of our net revenues from customers domiciled outside of the united states, respectively. because we generate substantial net revenues internationally, we are subject to the risks of doing business outside of the u.s., including those discussed under “item 1a. risk factors.” 35 we calculate the year-over-year impact of foreign currency exchange movements on our business using prior period foreign currency exchange rates applied to current period transactional currency amounts. while changes in foreign currency exchange rates affect our reported results, we have a foreign currency exchange exposure management program in which we designate certain foreign currency exchange contracts as cash flow hedges intended to reduce the impact on earnings from foreign currency exchange rate movements. gains and losses from these foreign currency exchange contracts are recognized as a component of transaction revenues in the same period the forecasted transactions impact earnings. in the years ended december 31, 2021 and 2020, the year-over-year foreign currency movements relative to the u.s. dollar had the following impact on our reported results: year ended december 31, 20212020 (in millions) favorable impact to net revenues (exclusive of hedging impact)$440 $66 hedging impact(190)20 favorable impact to net revenues 250 86 (unfavorable) favorable impact to operating expense(181)4 net favorable impact to operating income$69 $90 while we enter into foreign currency exchange contracts to help reduce the impact on earnings from foreign currency exchange rate movements, it is impossible to predict or eliminate the total effects of this exposure. we also used a foreign currency exchange contract, designated as a net investment hedge, to reduce the foreign currency exchange risk related to our investment in a foreign subsidiary. this contract matured in 2020. gains and losses associated with this instrument will remain in accumulated other comprehensive income until the foreign subsidiary is sold or substantially liquidated. additionally, in connection with transactions occurring in multiple currencies on our payments platform, we generally set our foreign currency exchange rates daily and may face financial exposure if we incorrectly set our foreign currency exchange rates or as a result of fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates between the times that we set our foreign currency exchange rates and when transactions occur. given that we also have foreign currency exchange risk on our assets and liabilities denominated in currencies other than the functional currency of our subsidiaries, we have an additional foreign currency exchange exposure management program in which we use foreign currency exchange contracts to offset the impact of foreign currency exchange rate movements on our assets and liabilities. the foreign currency exchange gains and losses on our assets and liabilities are recorded in other income (expense), net, and are offset by the gains and losses on the foreign currency exchange contracts. these foreign currency exchange contracts reduce, but do not entirely eliminate, the impact of foreign currency exchange rate movements on our assets and liabilities. key metrics and financial results key metrics active accounts, number of payment transactions, number of payment transactions per active account, and tpv are key non-financial performance metrics (“key metrics”) that management uses to measure the performance of our business, and are defined as follows: •an active account is an account registered directly with paypal or a platform access partner that has completed a transaction on our platform, not including gateway-exclusive transactions, within the past 12 months. a platform access partner is a third party whose customers are provided access to paypal’s platform or services through such third party’s login credentials, including entities that utilize hyperwallet’s payout capabilities. a user may register on our platform to access different products and may register more than one account to access a product. accordingly, a user may have more than one active account. the number of active accounts provides management with additional perspective on the growth and overall scale of our platform. 36 •number of payment transactions are the total number of payments, net of payment reversals, successfully completed on our payments platform or enabled by paypal via a partner payment solution, not including gateway-exclusive transactions. •number of payment transactions per active account reflects the total number of payment transactions within the previous 12-month period, divided by active accounts at the end of the period. the number of payment transactions per active account provides management with insight into the average number of times a customer account engages in payments activity on our payments platform in a given period. •tpv is the value of payments, net of payment reversals, successfully completed on our payments platform or enabled by paypal via a partner payment solution, not including gateway-exclusive transactions. as our transaction revenue is typically correlated with tpv growth and the number of payment transactions completed on our payments platform, management uses these metrics to gain insights into the scale and strength of our payments platform, the engagement level of our customers, and underlying activity and trends which are indicators of current and future performance. we present these key metrics to enhance investors’ evaluation of the performance of our business and operating results. our key metrics are calculated using internal company data based on the activity we measure on our platform and may be compiled from multiple systems, including systems that are organically developed or acquired through business combinations. while the measurement of our key metrics is based on what we believe to be reasonable methodologies and estimates, there are inherent challenges and limitations in measuring our key metrics globally at our scale. the methodologies used to calculate our key metrics require judgment. we regularly review our processes for calculating these key metrics, and from time to time we may make adjustments to improve their accuracy or relevance. for example, we continuously apply models, processes and practices designed to detect and prevent fraudulent account creation on our platforms, and work to improve and enhance those capabilities. when we detect a significant volume of illegitimate activity, we generally remove the activity identified from our key metrics. although such adjustments may impact key metrics reported in prior periods, we generally do not update previously reported key metrics to reflect these subsequent adjustments unless the retrospective impact of process improvements or enhancements is determined by management to be material. net revenues our revenues are classified into the following two categories: •transaction revenues: net transaction fees primarily charged to merchants on a transaction basis based on the tpv completed on our payments platform. growth in tpv is directly impacted by the number of payment transactions that we enable on our payments platform. we earn additional fees from merchants and consumers on transactions where we perform currency conversion, where we enable cross-border transactions (i.e., transactions where the merchant and consumer are in different countries), to facilitate the instant transfer of funds for our customers from their paypal or venmo account to their debit card or bank account, to facilitate the purchase and sale of cryptocurrencies, and other miscellaneous fees. •revenues from other value added services: net revenues derived primarily from revenue earned through partnerships, referral fees, subscription fees, gateway fees, and other services we provide to our merchants and consumers. we also earn revenues from interest and fees earned on our portfolio of loans receivable, and interest earned on certain assets underlying customer balances. our revenues can be significantly impacted by, but not limited to, the following: •the mix of merchants, products, and services; •the mix between domestic and cross-border transactions; •the geographic region or country in which a transaction occurs; and •the amount of our loans receivable outstanding with merchants and consumers. refer to “part i, item 1a, risk factors” in this form 10-k for further discussion on factors that impact our revenue. 37 net revenues analysis the components of our net revenues for the years ended december 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 were as follows (in millions): transaction revenues transaction revenues grew by $3.5 billion, or 17%, in 2021 compared to 2020 mainly attributable to our braintree and core paypal products and services, and to a lesser extent, venmo products and services driven by strong growth in tpv and the number of payment transactions on our payments platform. in the year ended december 31, 2021, we benefited from the recovery of travel and events verticals, which were adversely impacted in the prior year as a result of the covid-19 pandemic. these factors favorably impacting growth in transaction revenues in 2021 were partially offset by a decline in tpv and revenue we generate from ebay’s marketplace platform, which we expect to continue, to a lesser extent, to negatively impact revenue growth trends in the first half of 2022. in the first quarter of 2020, we experienced an adverse impact on our tpv and transaction revenues due to the initial impact of the covid-19 pandemic. in the second quarter of 2020, we benefited from a shift from in-store payment methods to digital payments (as described above) which was sustained throughout the remainder of 2020 and in 2021. the graphs below present the respective key metrics (in millions) for the years ended december 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019: *reflects active accounts at the end of the applicable period. active accounts as of december 31, 2021 and 2020 include 3.2 million active accounts contributed by paidy, inc. (“paidy”) on the date of acquisition in october 2021 and 10.2 million active accounts contributed by honey on the date of acquisition in january 2020, respectively. 38 the following table provides a summary of related metrics: year ended december 31,percent increase/(decrease) 20212020201920212020 number of payment transactions per active account45.4 40.9 40.6 11 %1 % percent of cross-border tpv16 %17 %18 %** ** ** not meaningful we had active accounts of 426 million and 377 million as of december 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, an increase of 13%. number of payment transactions were 19.3 billion and 15.4 billion as of december 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, an increase of 25%. tpv was $1.25 trillion and $936 billion as of december 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, an increase of 33%. transaction revenues grew more slowly than tpv and the number of payment transactions in 2021 due primarily to a decline in ebay’s marketplace platform tpv where we had historically earned higher rates, lower growth in foreign exchange fees, a higher portion of tpv generated through braintree by bill pay partners, large merchants, and other marketplaces which generally pay lower rates with higher transaction volumes, and an unfavorable impact from hedging. changes in prices charged to our customers did not significantly impact transaction revenue growth in 2021. revenues from other value added services revenues from other value added services increased by $433 million, or 28%, in 2021 compared to 2020 due primarily to increases in our revenue share with synchrony bank (“synchrony”) and fee revenue from the servicing of loans under the u.s government’s paycheck protection program (“ppp”) administered by the u.s. small business administration (“sba”) and enacted in march 2020 under the coronavirus aid, relief, and economic security act in response to the covid-19 pandemic. we do not own the receivables associated with loans originated through the ppp. the fee revenue associated with the ppp loans in the year ended december 31, 2021 was $157 million, which included revenue recognized upon loan forgiveness and the extinguishment of our servicing obligations for a portion of the outstanding loans. at december 31, 2021, the remaining unearned fee revenue associated with the ppp loans was not material. the growth in revenue from other value added services in the year ended december 31, 2021 was also attributable to an increase in interest and fee revenue on our consumer loans receivable portfolio driven primarily by growth in international markets, partially offset by a decline in interest and fee revenue on our merchant loans receivable portfolio due to a decrease in average outstanding loans year-over-year and a decline in interest earned on certain assets underlying customer account balances resulting from lower interest rates. the total gross consumer and merchant loans receivable balance as of december 31, 2021 and 2020 was $5.3 billion and $3.6 billion, respectively, reflecting a year-over-year increase of 48% driven primarily by growth in our consumer receivable portfolio due to the expansion of our installment credit products, including the entry into new markets. in response to the covid-19 pandemic, we took both proactive and reactive measures during 2020 to support our merchants and consumers that had loans and interest receivables due to us under our credit product offerings. these measures were intended to help reduce financial difficulties experienced by our customers and included providing payment holidays to grant payment deferrals to certain borrowers for varying periods of time, and amended payment terms through loan modifications in certain cases. given the uncertainty surrounding the covid-19 pandemic, including its duration and severity, related global economic conditions and the ultimate impact it may have on the financial condition of our merchants and consumers, the extent of these types of actions and their prospective impact on our interest and fee income is not determinable. in addition, consumers that have outstanding loans and interest receivable due to synchrony may experience similar hardships that result in increased losses recognized by synchrony, which may result in a decrease in our revenue share earned from synchrony in future periods. in the event the overall return on the paypal branded credit programs funded by synchrony does not meet a minimum rate of return (“minimum return threshold”) in a particular quarter, our revenue share for that period would be zero. further, in the event the overall return on the paypal branded credit programs managed by synchrony does not meet the minimum return threshold as measured over four consecutive quarters and in the following quarter, we would be required to make a payment to synchrony, subject to certain limitations. through december 31, 2021, the overall return on the paypal branded credit programs funded by synchrony exceeded the minimum return threshold. seasonality the company does not experience meaningful seasonality with respect to net revenues. no individual quarter in 2021, 2020, or 2019 accounted for more than 30% of annual net revenue. 39 operating expenses the following table summarizes our operating expenses and related metrics we use to assess the trends in each: year ended december 31,percent increase/(decrease) 20212020201920212020 (in millions, except percentages) transaction expense$10,315 $7,934 $6,790 30 %17 % transaction and credit losses1,060 1,741 1,380 (39)%26 % customer support and operations2,075 1,778 1,615 17 %10 % sales and marketing2,445 1,861 1,401 31 %33 % technology and development3,038 2,642 2,085 15 %27 % general and administrative2,114 2,070 1,711 2 %21 % restructuring and other charges62 139 71 (55)%96 % total operating expenses$21,109 $18,165 $15,053 16 %21 % transaction expense rate(1) 0.83 %0.85 %0.95 %**** transaction and credit loss rate(2) 0.09 %0.19 %0.19 %**** (1) transaction expense rate is calculated by dividing transaction expense by tpv. (2) transaction and credit loss rate is calculated by dividing transaction and credit losses by tpv. ** not meaningful. transaction expense transaction expense is primarily composed of the costs we incur to accept a customer’s funding source of payment. these costs include fees paid to payment processors and other financial institutions when we draw funds from a customer’s credit or debit card, bank account, or other funding source they have stored in their digital wallet. we refer to the allocation of funding sources used by our consumers as our “funding mix.” the cost of funding a transaction with a credit or debit card is generally higher than the cost of funding a transaction from a bank or through internal sources such as a paypal or venmo account balance or our consumer credit products. as we expand the availability and presentation of alternative funding sources to our customers, our funding mix may change, which could increase or decrease our transaction expense rate. the cost of funding a transaction is also impacted by the geographic region or country in which a transaction occurs, as we generally pay lower rates for transactions funded with credit or debit cards outside the u.s. our transaction expense rate is impacted by changes in product mix, merchant mix, regional mix, funding mix, and fees paid to payment processors and other financial institutions. macroeconomic environment changes may also result in behavioral shifts in consumer spending patterns affecting the type of funding source they use, which also impacts the funding mix. transaction expense increased by $2.4 billion, or 30%, in 2021 compared to 2020 due primarily to an increase in tpv of 33%. the decrease in transaction expense rate in 2021 compared to 2020 was due primarily to a decline in transaction expense rates associated with both our core paypal and braintree products, offset by an increase in the share of volume associated with our braintree products. for the years ended december 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, approximately 39%, 40%, and 41% of tpv, respectively, was generated outside of the u.s. 40 transaction and credit losses transaction losses include the expense associated with our buyer and seller protection programs, fraud, and chargebacks. credit losses include the losses associated with our merchant and consumer loans receivable portfolio. beginning in 2020, these losses are based on current expected credit losses. our transaction and credit losses fluctuate depending on many factors, including tpv, product mix, current and projected macroeconomic conditions including unemployment rates, merchant insolvency events, changes to and usage of our customer protection programs, the impact of regulatory changes, and the credit quality of loans receivable arising from transactions funded with our credit products for consumers and loans and advances to merchants. the components of our transaction and credit losses (in millions) for the years ended december 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 were as follows: transaction and credit losses decreased by $681 million, or 39%, in 2021 compared to 2020. transaction losses were $1.2 billion and $1.1 billion for the years ended december 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, reflecting an increase of $18 million, or 2%, year-over-year. transaction loss rate (transaction losses divided by tpv) was 0.09%, 0.12%, and 0.15% for the years ended december 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. the increase in transaction losses was due primarily to growth in tpv, partially offset by benefits realized from continued risk mitigation strategies, which also contributed to a decrease in our transaction loss rate over the same period. the duration and severity of the impacts of the covid-19 pandemic and related global economic conditions remain unknown. any negative impacts on macroeconomic conditions could increase the risk of merchant bankruptcy, insolvency, business failure, or other business interruption, which may adversely impact our transaction losses, particularly for merchants that sell goods or services in advance of the date of their delivery or use. credit losses decreased by $699 million, or 115%, in 2021 compared to 2020. the components of credit losses for the years ended december 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 were as follows (in millions): year ended december 31, 202120202019(1) net charge-offs(2) $219 $310 $208 reserve build (release)(3) (312)296 80 credit losses$(93)$606 $288 (1) credit losses for the year end december 31, 2019 were based on accounting guidance which was superseded by the adoption of accounting standards update 2016-13, financial instruments - credit losses (topic 326): measurement of credit losses on financial instruments (“cecl”), effective january 1, 2020. (2) net charge-offs includes the principal charge-offs partially offset by recoveries for consumer and merchant receivables. (3) reserve build (release) represents change in allowance for principal receivables excluding foreign currency remeasurement and, for 2020, impact of adoption of cecl. 41 the benefit in the year ended december 31, 2021 was attributable to the net release of reserves for loans receivable due to improvements in both current and projected macroeconomic conditions, including lower projected unemployment rates, as well as improvements in the credit quality of loans outstanding, partially offset by provisions for originations during the period. allowances for our merchant and consumer portfolios included qualitative adjustments which took into account continued volatility with respect to macroeconomic conditions, as well as uncertainty around the financial health of our merchant borrowers, including uncertainty around the effectiveness of loan modification programs made available to merchants. the credit losses in the year ended december 31, 2020 were primarily associated with an increase in provisions for our loans receivable portfolio resulting from a reserve build driven by a sharp deterioration in macroeconomic projections reflecting the anticipated impact of the covid-19 pandemic and provisions associated with originations, both of which significantly increased our then current expected credit losses, and to a lesser extent, changes in credit quality during the period. the increase in provisions associated with macroeconomic projections in the year ended december 31, 2020 included qualitative adjustments to account for the impact of limitations in our expected credit loss models resulting from the extreme fluctuations in both the actual and projected macroeconomic conditions during the period as well as to incorporate varying degrees of merchant performance in the current environment and expected performance in future periods. the consumer loans and interest receivable balance as of december 31, 2021 and 2020 was $3.8 billion and $2.2 billion, respectively, representing a year-over-year increase of 77% driven by growth of our installment credit products in international markets and the u.s. and, to a lesser extent, growth of paypal credit in international markets. approximately 53% and 77% of our consumer loans receivable outstanding as of december 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, were due from consumers in the u.k. the decline in the percentage of consumer loans receivable outstanding in the u.k. at december 31, 2021 compared to december 31, 2020 was due to overall growth in the consumer loan portfolio, particularly from installment credit products in other markets. the following table provides information regarding the credit quality of our consumer loans and interest receivable balance: december 31, 20212020 percent of consumer loans and interest receivable current97.0 %97.9 % percent of consumer loans and interest receivable > 90 days outstanding (1) 1.5 %0.9 % net charge-off rate(2) 4.3 %2.4 % (1) represents percentage of balances which are 90 days past the billing date or contractual repayment date, as applicable. (2) net charge-off rate is the annual ratio of net credit losses, excluding fraud losses, on consumer loans receivable as a percentage of the average daily amount of consumer loans and interest receivable balance during the period. the net charge-off rate at december 31, 2020 benefited from payment holidays provided by the company as a part of our covid-19 payment relief initiatives. we offer access to merchant finance products for certain small and medium-sized businesses, which we refer to as our merchant finance offerings. total merchant loans, advances, and interest and fees receivable outstanding, net of participation interest sold, as of both december 31, 2021 and 2020 were approximately $1.4 billion. approximately 82% and 8% of our merchant receivables outstanding as of december 31, 2021 were due from merchants in the u.s. and u.k., as compared to approximately 81% and 10% as of december 31, 2020, respectively. the following table provides information regarding the credit quality of our merchant loans, advances, and interest and fees receivable balance: december 31, 20212020 percent of merchant receivables within original expected or contractual repayment period91.8 %75.4 % percent of merchant receivables > 90 days outstanding after the end of original expected or contractual repayment period3.1 %12.5 % net charge-off rate (1) 4.7 %18.9 % (1) net charge-off rate is the annual ratio of net credit losses, excluding fraud losses, on merchant loans and advances as a percentage of the average daily amount of merchant loans, advances, and interest and fees receivable balance during the period. 42 the increase in the percent of current merchant receivables, decrease in percent of merchant receivables greater than 90 days outstanding, and decrease in the net charge-off rate for merchant receivables at december 31, 2021 as compared to december 31, 2020 were primarily due to the charge-off of accounts that experienced financial difficulties as a result of the covid-19 pandemic in the prior year as well as improved performance in the current year partially attributable to the below mentioned modifications to the acceptable risk parameters including tightening of eligibility terms. beginning in the third quarter of 2020, we granted certain merchants loan modifications intended to provide them with financial relief and help enable us to mitigate losses. the associated loans and interest receivable have been treated as troubled debt restructurings due to the borrowers experiencing financial difficulty and significant changes in their loan structure, including repayment terms and/or fee and rate structure. modifications to the acceptable risk parameters of our credit products in 2020 in response to the impacts of the covid-19 pandemic resulted in the implementation of a number of risk mitigation strategies, including reduction of maximum loan size, tightening eligibility terms, and a shift from automated to manual underwriting of loans and advances. these changes in acceptable risk parameters resulted in a decrease in originations in 2020 as compared to pre-pandemic levels. we continue to evaluate and modify our acceptable risk parameters in response to the changing macroeconomic environment and such changes in 2021 have resulted in a gradual increase in originations over the past nine months. while the impact of the covid-19 pandemic on the economic environment remains uncertain, the longer and more severe the pandemic, the more likely it may have a material adverse impact on our borrowing base, which is primarily comprised of small and medium-sized merchants. for additional information, see “note 11—loans and interest receivable” in the notes to the consolidated financial statements, and “item 1a. risk factors—our credit products expose us to additional risks” included in this form 10-k. customer support and operations customer support and operations includes costs incurred in our global customer operations centers, including costs to provide call support to our customers, costs to support our trust and security programs protecting our merchants and consumers, and other costs incurred related to the delivery of our products, including payment devices, card production, and customer onboarding and compliance costs. customer support and operations costs increased $297 million, or 17%, in 2021 compared to 2020. the increase in 2021 was primarily attributable to increases in employee-related expenses, customer onboarding and compliance costs, and contractors and consulting costs that support the growth of our active accounts and payment transactions. 43 sales and marketing sales and marketing includes costs incurred for customer acquisition, business development, advertising, and marketing programs. sales and marketing expenses increased $584 million, or 31%, in 2021 compared to 2020 due primarily to higher spending on marketing programs, including targeted user incentives to promote increased user engagement and new user acquisition, and, to a lesser extent, an increase in employee-related expenses. technology and development technology and development includes costs incurred in connection with the development of our payments platform, new products, and the improvement of our existing products, including the amortization of software and website development costs incurred in developing our payments platform, which are capitalized. it also includes acquired developed technology and our site operations and other infrastructure costs incurred to support our payments platform. technology and development expenses increased $396 million, or 15%, in 2021 compared to 2020 due primarily to increases in cloud computing services utilized in delivering our products, costs related to contractors and consultants, and, to a lesser extent, amortization expense associated with internally developed software. 44 general and administrative general and administrative includes costs incurred to provide support to our business, including legal, human resources, finance, risk and compliance, executive, and other support operations. general and administrative expenses increased $44 million, or 2%, in 2021 compared to 2020 due primarily to increases in employee-related expenses and costs associated with enterprise software services, partially offset by a decline in professional services expenses. restructuring and other charges restructuring and other charges primarily consist of restructuring expenses. restructuring and other charges decreased by $77 million in 2021 compared to 2020. during the first quarter of 2020, management approved a strategic reduction of the existing global workforce as part of a multiphase process to reorganize our workforce concurrently with the redesign of our operating structure, which spanned multiple quarters. during the years ended december 31, 2021 and 2020, the associated restructuring changes were $27 million and $109 million, respectively. we primarily incurred employee severance and benefits costs, as well as other associated consulting costs under the 2020 strategic reduction, substantially all of which have been accrued as of the second quarter of 2021. for information on the associated restructuring liability, see “note 17—restructuring and other charges” in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this form 10-k. additionally, in 2021 and 2020, we incurred asset impairment charges of $26 million and $30 million, respectively, due to exiting certain leased properties which resulted in a reduction of certain right-of-use lease assets and related leasehold improvements. other income (expense), net other income (expense), net decreased $1.9 billion, or 109%, in 2021 compared to 2020 due primarily to lower net gains on strategic investments of $46 million in 2021 compared to $1.9 billion in 2020. 45 income tax (benefit) expense our effective tax rate was (2)% in 2021 and 17% in 2020. the decrease in our effective tax rate in 2021 was primarily the result of a decrease in tax expense related to the intra-group transfers of intellectual property, an increase in tax benefits associated with stock-based compensation deductions, and a decrease in tax expense associated with lower net gains on strategic investments. see “note 16—income taxes” to the consolidated financial statements included in this form 10-k for more information on our effective tax rate. liquidity and capital resources we require liquidity and access to capital to fund our global operations, including customer protection programs, our credit products, capital expenditures, investments in our business, potential acquisitions and strategic investments, working capital, and other cash needs. we believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents, and investments, cash expected to be generated from operations, and our expected access to capital markets, together with potential external funding through third party sources, will be sufficient to meet our cash requirements within the next twelve months and beyond. sources of liquidity cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash the following table summarizes our cash, cash equivalents, and investments as of december 31, 2021 and 2020: year ended december 31, 20212020 (in millions) cash, cash equivalents, and investments(1)(2) $12,981 $15,852 (1) excludes assets related to funds receivable and customer accounts of $36.1 billion and $33.4 billion as of december 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. (2) excludes total restricted cash of $109 million and $88 million at december 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and strategic investments of $3.2 billion as of both december 31, 2021 and 2020. cash, cash equivalents, and investments held by our foreign subsidiaries were $7.4 billion at december 31, 2021 and $7.0 billion at december 31, 2020, or 57% and 44%, of our total cash, cash equivalents, and investments as of those respective dates. at december 31, 2021, all of our cash, cash equivalents, and investments held by foreign subsidiaries were subject to u.s. taxation under subpart f, global intangible low taxed income (“gilti”), or the one-time transition tax under the tax cuts and jobs act of 2017 (“tax act”). subsequent repatriations to the u.s. will not be taxable from a u.s. federal tax perspective, but may be subject to state income or foreign withholding tax. a significant aspect of our global cash management activities involves meeting our customers’ requirements to access their cash while simultaneously meeting our regulatory financial ratio commitments in various jurisdictions. our global cash balances are required not only to provide operational liquidity to our businesses, but also to support our global regulatory requirements across our regulated subsidiaries. accordingly, not all of our cash is available for general corporate purposes. cash flows the following table summarizes our consolidated statements of cash flows: year ended december 31, 202120202019 (in millions) net cash provided by (used in): operating activities$6,340 $5,854 $4,071 investing activities(5,485)(16,218)(5,742) financing activities(764)12,492 4,187 effect of exchange rates on cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash(102)169 (6) net increase in cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash$(11)$2,297 $2,510 46 operating activities cash flows from operating activities includes net income adjusted for certain non-cash expenses, timing differences between expenses recognized for provision for transaction and credit losses and actual cash transaction losses incurred, and changes in other assets and liabilities. significant non-cash expenses for the period include depreciation and amortization and stock-based compensation. the cash impact from actual transaction losses incurred during a period is reflected as changes in other assets and liabilities. the expenses recognized during the period for provision for credit losses are estimates of current expected credit losses on our merchant and consumer credit products. actual charge-offs of receivables related to our merchants and consumer credit products have no impact on cash from operating activities. we generated cash from operating activities of $6.3 billion in 2021 due primarily to operating income of $4.3 billion, as well as adjustments for non-cash expenses including stock-based compensation of $1.4 billion, depreciation and amortization of $1.3 billion, and provision for transaction and credit losses of $1.1 billion. net income was also adjusted for deferred income taxes of $482 million, an increase in accounts receivable of $222 million, and changes in other assets and liabilities primarily related to actual cash transaction losses incurred during the period of $1.2 billion, partially offset by an increase in other liabilities of $406 million. we generated cash from operating activities of $5.9 billion in 2020 due primarily to operating income of $3.3 billion, as well as adjustments for non-cash expenses including provision for transaction and credit losses of $1.7 billion, stock-based compensation of $1.4 billion, and depreciation and amortization of $1.2 billion. net income was also adjusted for net gains on our strategic investments of $1.9 billion, changes in other assets and liabilities primarily related to actual cash transaction losses incurred during the period of $1.1 billion, and an increase in other assets of $498 million, partially offset by an increase in other liabilities of $1.0 billion. cash paid for income taxes, net in 2021, 2020, and 2019 was $474 million, $565 million, and $665 million, respectively. investing activities cash flows from investing activities includes purchases, maturities and sales of investments, cash paid for acquisitions and strategic investments, purchases and sales of property and equipment, changes in principal loans receivable, and funds receivable. the net cash used in investing activities of $5.5 billion in 2021 was due primarily to purchases of investments of $40.1 billion, acquisitions (net of cash acquired) of $2.8 billion, changes in principal loans receivable, net of $1.6 billion, and purchases of property and equipment of $908 million. these cash outflows were partially offset by maturities and sales of investments of $39.7 billion and changes in funds receivable from customers of $193 million. the net cash used in investing activities of $16.2 billion in 2020 was due primarily to purchases of investments of $41.5 billion, acquisitions (net of cash acquired) of $3.6 billion, changes in funds receivable from customers of $1.6 billion, and purchases of property and equipment of $866 million. these cash outflows were partially offset by maturities and sales of investments of $30.9 billion, changes in principal loans receivable, net of $294 million, and proceeds from the sale of property and equipment of $120 million. financing activities cash flows from financing activities includes proceeds from issuance of common stock, purchases of treasury stock, tax withholdings related to net share settlements of equity awards, borrowings and repayments under financing arrangements, and funds payable and amounts due to customers. the net cash used in financing activities of $764 million in 2021 was due primarily to the repurchase of $3.4 billion of our common stock under our stock repurchase program, tax withholdings of $1.0 billion related to net share settlement of equity awards, and repayments of borrowings under paidy credit agreements of $361 million. these cash outflows were partially offset by changes in funds payable and amounts due to customers of $3.6 billion and cash proceeds from borrowings under paidy credit agreements of $272 million. 47 we generated cash from financing activities of $12.5 billion in 2020 due primarily to changes in funds payable and amounts due to customers of $10.6 billion and $7.0 billion of cash proceeds from the issuance of long-term debt in the form of fixed rate notes as well as proceeds from borrowings under our credit agreement (as defined below under “available credit and debt”). these cash inflows were partially offset by repayment of outstanding borrowings under our credit agreement of $3.0 billion, the repurchase of $1.6 billion of our common stock under our stock repurchase programs, and tax withholdings related to net share settlement of equity awards of $521 million. effect of exchange rates on cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash foreign currency exchange rates had a negative impact of $102 million and a positive impact of $169 million on cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash during 2021 and 2020, respectively. the negative and positive impacts in 2021 and 2020, respectively, resulted primarily from fluctuations in the exchange rate of the u.s. dollar to the australian dollar. the negative impact in 2021 included, to a lesser extent, the unfavorable impact of fluctuations in the exchange rate of the u.s. dollar to the euro and swedish krona. available credit and debt in september 2019, we entered into a credit agreement (the “credit agreement”) that provides for an unsecured $5.0 billion, five-year revolving credit facility that includes a $150 million letter of credit sub-facility and a $500 million swingline sub-facility, with available borrowings under the revolving credit facility reduced by the amount of any letters of credit and swingline borrowings outstanding from time to time. as of december 31, 2021, no borrowings were outstanding under the credit agreement and as such, $5.0 billion of borrowing capacity was available for the purposes permitted by the credit agreement, subject to customary conditions to borrowing. in october 2021, we assumed a credit agreement through our acquisition of paidy (the “paidy credit agreement”). the paidy credit agreement provides for a secured revolving credit facility of approximately $198 million. borrowings under the paidy credit agreement must be used to fund the origination of loan receivables. as of december 31, 2021, approximately $98 million was outstanding under the paidy credit agreement. accordingly, at december 31, 2021, approximately $100 million of borrowing capacity was available for the purposes permitted by the paidy credit agreement, subject to customary conditions to borrowing. we maintain uncommitted credit facilities in various regions throughout the world with a borrowing capacity of approximately $90 million in the aggregate, where we can withdraw and utilize the funds at our discretion for general corporate purposes. as of december 31, 2021, the majority of the borrowing capacity under these credit facilities was available, subject to customary conditions to borrowing. in may 2020 and september 2019, we issued fixed rate notes with varying maturity dates for an aggregate principal amount of $9.0 billion (collectively referred to as the “notes”). proceeds from the issuance of these notes may be used for general corporate purposes, which may include funding the repayment or redemption of outstanding debt, share repurchases, ongoing operations, capital expenditures, and possible acquisitions of businesses, assets, or strategic investments. as of december 31, 2021, we had $9.0 billion in fixed rate debt outstanding with varying maturity dates. for additional information, see “note 12—debt” to our consolidated financial statements included in this form 10-k. depending on market conditions, we may from time to time issue debt, including in private or public offerings, to fund our operating activities, finance acquisitions, make strategic investments, repurchase shares under our stock repurchase program, or reduce our cost of capital. we have a cash pooling arrangement with a financial institution for cash management purposes. the arrangement allows for cash withdrawals from the financial institution based upon our aggregate operating cash balances held within the financial institution (“aggregate cash deposits”). the arrangement also allows us to withdraw amounts exceeding the aggregate cash deposits up to an agreed-upon limit. the net balance of the withdrawals and the aggregate cash deposits are used by the financial institution as a basis for calculating our net interest expense or income under the arrangement. as of december 31, 2021, we had a total of $3.5 billion in cash withdrawals offsetting our $3.5 billion in aggregate cash deposits held within the financial institution under the cash pooling arrangement. 48 credit ratings as of december 31, 2021, we continue to be rated investment grade by standard and poor’s financial services, llc, fitch ratings, inc., and moody’s investors services inc. we expect that these credit rating agencies will continue to monitor our performance, including our capital structure and results of operations. our goal is to be rated investment grade, but as circumstances change, there are factors that could result in our credit ratings being downgraded or put on a watch list for possible downgrading. if that were to occur, it could increase our borrowing rates, including the interest rate on borrowings under our credit agreement. current and future cash requirements our material cash requirements include funds to support current and potential: operating activities, credit products, customer protection programs, stock repurchases, strategic investments, acquisitions, other commitments, and capital expenditures and other future obligations. credit products growth in our portfolio of loan receivables increases our liquidity needs, and any inability to meet those liquidity needs could adversely affect our business. we continue to evaluate partnerships and third party sources of funding for our loans receivable portfolio. in june 2018, the luxembourg commission de surveillance du secteur financier (the “cssf”) agreed that paypal’s management may designate up to 35% of european customer balances held in our luxembourg banking subsidiary to be used for european and u.s. credit activities. during the first quarter of 2021, an additional $700 million was approved to fund such credit activities. as of december 31, 2021, the cumulative amount approved by management to be designated for credit activities aggregated to $2.7 billion and represented approximately 27% of european customer balances that have been made available for our corporate use at that date as determined by applying financial regulations maintained by the cssf. we may periodically seek to designate additional amounts of customer balances, if necessary, based on utilization of the approved funds and anticipated credit funding requirements. while our objective is to expand the availability of our credit products with capital from external sources, there can be no assurance that we will be successful in achieving that goal. under certain exceptional circumstances, corporate liquidity could be called upon to meet our obligations related to our european customer balances. in april 2020, paypal was approved to participate in the ppp administered by the sba. the program was designed to provide a direct incentive for small businesses to keep their workers on payroll during the covid-19 pandemic and includes initial loan repayment deferrals and debt forgiveness provisions for eligible borrowers. loans made under this program are funded by an independent chartered financial institution that we partner with, and the related receivables are not purchased by paypal. we receive a fee for providing origination services and loan servicing for the loans and retain operational risk related to those activities. customer protection programs the risk of losses from our buyer and seller protection programs are specific to individual customers, merchants, and transactions, and may also be impacted by regional variations in, and changes or modifications to, the programs, including as a result of changes in regulatory requirements. for the periods presented in these consolidated financial statements included in this report, our transaction loss rates have ranged between 0.09% and 0.15% of tpv. historical loss rates may not be indicative of future results. the duration and severity of the impacts of the covid-19 pandemic and related global economic conditions remain unknown. the negative impacts on macroeconomic conditions could increase the risk of merchant bankruptcy, insolvency, business failure, or other business interruption, which may result in an adverse impact on our transaction losses, particularly for merchants that sell goods or services in advance of the date of their delivery or use. stock repurchases during the year ended december 31, 2021, we repurchased approximately $3.4 billion of our common stock in the open market under our stock repurchase program authorized in july 2018. as of december 31, 2021, a total of approximately $5.1 billion remained available for future repurchases of our common stock under our july 2018 stock repurchase program. for additional information, see “note 14—stock repurchase programs” to our consolidated financial statements included in this form 10-k. 49 acquisitions in october 2021, we completed the acquisition of paidy, inc. (“paidy”) for approximately $2.7 billion, consisting of approximately $2.6 billion in cash, and approximately $161 million in assumed restricted stock and restricted stock units, subject to vesting conditions. paidy is a two-sided payments platform that primarily provides buy now, pay later solutions (installment credit offerings) in japan. with the acquisition of paidy, we intend to expand our capabilities and relevance in japan. in 2021, we completed four other acquisitions for an aggregate purchase price of $542 million, consisting primarily of cash consideration. for additional information, see “note 4—business combinations” in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this form 10-k. other commitments in 2020, we announced our commitment to invest $535 million to support racial equality. as of december 31, 2021, we have deployed substantially all the commitment through charitable contributions, grants to small businesses, internal investments to support and strengthen diversity and inclusion initiatives, and an economic opportunity fund focused on bolstering our relationships with community banks and credit unions serving underrepresented minority communities, as well as investing directly into black- and minority-led startups and minority-focused investment funds, among other initiatives. future obligations as of december 31, 2021, approximately $4.1 billion of unused credit was available to paypal credit account holders compared to $3.0 billion of unused credit as of december 31, 2020. substantially all of the paypal credit account holders with unused credit are in the u.k. while this amount represents the total unused credit available, we have not experienced, and do not anticipate, that all of our paypal credit account holders will access their entire available credit at any given point in time. in addition, the individual lines of credit that make up this unused credit are subject to periodic review and termination based on, among other things, account usage and customer creditworthiness. we have certain fixed contractual obligations and commitments that include future estimated payments for general operating purposes. changes in our business needs, contractual cancellation provisions, fluctuating interest rates, and other factors may result in actual payments differing from our estimates. we cannot provide certainty regarding the timing and amounts of these payments. the following table summarizes our obligations as of december 31, 2021 that are expected to impact liquidity and cash flow in future periods. we believe we will be able to fund these obligations through our existing cash and investment portfolio and cash expected to be generated from operations. purchaseobligationsoperatingleasestransition taxlong-term debttotal payments due during the year ending december 31,(in millions) 2022$562 $162 $114 $1,213 $2,051 2023269 157 212 1,185 1,823 2024327 139 284 1,428 2,178 202564 108 354 1,140 1,666 202652 91 — 1,381 1,524 thereafter— 192 — 4,473 4,665 $1,274 $849 $964 $10,820 $13,907 the significant assumptions used in our determination of amounts presented in the above table are as follows: •purchase obligation amounts include minimum purchase commitments for advertising, capital expenditures (computer equipment, software applications, engineering development services, and construction contracts), data center and cloud computing services, and other goods and services entered into in the ordinary course of business. •operating lease amounts include minimum rental payments under our non-cancelable operating leases (including leases not yet commenced) primarily for office and data center facilities. the amounts presented are consistent with contractual terms and are not expected to differ significantly from actual results under our existing leases, unless a substantial change in our headcount needs requires us to expand our occupied space or exit an office facility early. •transition tax represents the one-time mandatory tax on previously deferred foreign earnings under the tax act. 50 •long-term debt amounts represent the future principal and interest payments (based on contractual interest rates) on our fixed-rate debt. for more information, see “note 12—debt” to our consolidated financial statements included in this form 10-k. as we are unable to reasonably predict the timing of settlement of liabilities related to unrecognized tax benefits, net, the table above does not include $1.6 billion of such non-current liabilities included in deferred and other tax liabilities recorded on our consolidated balance sheet as of december 31, 2021. other considerations our liquidity, access to capital, and borrowing costs could be adversely impacted by declines in our credit rating, our financial performance, and global credit market conditions, as well as a broad range of other factors, including those related to the covid-19 pandemic discussed in this form 10-k. in addition, our liquidity, access to capital, and borrowing costs could also be negatively impacted by the outcome of any of the legal or regulatory proceedings to which we are a party. see “item 1a. risk factors” and “note 13—commitments and contingencies” to our consolidated financial statements included in this form 10-k for additional discussion of these and other risks that our business faces. critical accounting polices and estimates the application of u.s. generally accepted accounting principles (“gaap”) requires us to make estimates and assumptions about certain items and future events that directly affect our reported financial condition. we have established detailed policies and control procedures to provide reasonable assurance that the methods used to make estimates and assumptions are well controlled and are applied consistently from period to period. the accounting estimates and assumptions discussed in this section are those that we consider to be the most critical to our financial statements. an accounting estimate or assumption is considered critical if both (a) the nature of the estimate or assumption is material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment involved, and (b) the impact within a reasonable range of outcomes of the estimate and assumption is material to our financial condition. management has discussed the development, selection, and disclosure of these estimates with the audit, risk, and compliance committee of our board of directors. our significant accounting policies, including recent accounting pronouncements, are described in “note 1—overview and summary of significant accounting policies” to the consolidated financial statements included in this form 10‑k. a quantitative sensitivity analysis is provided where information is available to reasonably estimate the impact, and provides material information to investors. the amounts used to assess sensitivity are included to allow users of this report to understand a general directional cause and effect of changes in the estimates and do not represent management’s predictions of variability. for all these estimates, it should be noted that future events rarely develop exactly as forecasted, and such estimates require regular review and adjustment. allowance for transaction and credit losses transaction and credit losses include the expense associated with our customer protection programs, fraud, chargebacks, and credit losses associated with our loans receivable balances. our transaction and credit losses fluctuate depending on many factors, including: total tpv, product mix, current and projected macroeconomic conditions including unemployment rates, merchant insolvency events, changes to and usage of our customer protection programs, the impact of regulatory changes, and the credit quality of loans receivable arising from transactions funded with our credit products, which include revolving and installment credit products offered to consumers at checkout and merchant loans and advances arising from the paypal working capital (“ppwc”) and paypal business loan (“ppbl”) products. we establish allowances for negative customer balances and estimated transaction losses arising from processing customer transactions, such as chargebacks for unauthorized credit card use and merchant-related chargebacks due to non-delivery or unsatisfactory delivery of purchased items, buyer protection program claims, account takeovers, and automated clearing house returns. additions to the allowance, in the form of provisions, are reflected in transaction and credit losses on our consolidated statements of income. the allowances are based on known facts and circumstances, internal factors including experience with similar cases, historical trends involving collection and write-off patterns, and the mix of transaction and loss types, as well as current and projected macroeconomic factors, as appropriate. 51 we also establish an allowance for loans and interest receivable, which represents our estimate of current expected credit losses inherent in our portfolio of loans and interest receivable. this evaluation process is subject to numerous estimates and judgments. the allowance is primarily based on expectations of credit losses based on historical lifetime loss data as well as macroeconomic forecasts applied to the portfolio, which is segmented by factors such as geographic region, delinquency, and vintage. loss curves are generated using historical loss data for each loan portfolio and are applied to segments of each portfolio, categorized by factors such as geographic region, first borrowing versus repeat borrowing, delinquency, credit rating and vintage, which vary by portfolio. we then apply macroeconomic factors such as forecasted trends in unemployment and benchmark credit card charge-off rates, which are sourced externally, using a single scenario that we believe is most appropriate to the economic conditions applicable to a particular period. we utilize externally sourced macroeconomic scenario data to supplement our historical information due to the limited period in which our credit product offerings have been in existence. projected loss rates, inclusive of historical loss data and macroeconomic factors, are applied to the principal amount of our consumer and merchant receivables. we also include qualitative adjustments that incorporate incremental information not captured in the quantitative estimates of our current expected credit losses. our consumer receivables consist of revolving products, which do not have a contractual term, and installment products. the reasonable and supportable forecast period for revolving products, installment products, and merchant products that we have included in our projected loss rates, which approximates the estimated life of the loans, is approximately 2 years, approximately 7 months to 2.5 years, and approximately 2.5 to 3.5 years, respectively. in 2020, the reasonable and supportable forecast period for revolving consumer products was based only on externally sourced data due to the lack of availability of historical data, and in 2021, it was updated to reflect historical loss experience with the portfolio. the allowance for current expected credit losses on interest and fees receivable is determined primarily by applying loss curves to each portfolio by geography, delinquency, and period of origination, among other factors. determining appropriate current expected credit loss allowances for loans and interest receivable is an inherently uncertain process and ultimate losses may vary from the current estimates. we regularly update our allowance estimates as new facts become known and events occur that may impact the settlement or recovery of losses. the allowances are maintained at a level we deem appropriate to adequately provide for current expected credit losses at the balance sheet date after incorporating the impact of externally sourced macroeconomic forecasts. these forecasts project scenarios such as future unemployment and benchmark credit card charge-off rates. as of december 31, 2021, we utilized externally published projections of the u.s. and u.k. forecasted unemployment rates over the reasonable and supportable forecast period. as of december 31, 2020, we utilized externally published projections of the u.s. forecasted credit card charge-off rates and u.k forecasted unemployment rates over the reasonable and supportable forecast period. the overall principal and interest coverage ratio as of december 31, 2021 and 2020 was approximately 9% and 23%, respectively. a significant change in the forecasted macroeconomic factors could result in a material change in our allowances. our allowance as of december 31, 2021 took into account continued volatility with respect to macroeconomic conditions and uncertainty around the financial health of our merchant borrowers, including uncertainty around the effectiveness of loan modification programs made available to merchants. our allowance as of december 31, 2020 took into account for the proactive and reactive measures that we took to help reduce financial difficulties experienced by our customers, limitations in our expected credit loss models that arose due to the extreme fluctuations in both the actual and forecasted macroeconomic conditions in the period, varying degrees of merchant performance in the current environment as well as expected future performance, and to account for payment holidays granted. we are unable to predict the ultimate impact of these actions which may result in adjustments to our allowance for loans and interest receivable in future periods. an increase of 1% in the principal and interest coverage ratio would increase our allowances by approximately $53 million based on the loans and interest receivable balance outstanding as of december 31, 2021. accounting for income taxes our annual tax rate is based on our income, statutory tax rates, and tax planning opportunities available to us in the various jurisdictions in which we operate. tax laws are complex and subject to different interpretations by the taxpayer and respective government taxing authorities. significant judgment is required in determining our tax expense and in evaluating our tax positions, including evaluating uncertainties. we review our tax positions quarterly and adjust the balances as new information becomes available. our income tax rate is significantly affected by the tax rates that apply to our foreign earnings. in addition to local country tax laws and regulations, our income tax rate depends on the extent that our foreign earnings are taxed by the u.s. through provisions such as the gilti tax and base erosion anti-abuse tax or as a result of our indefinite reinvestment assertion. indefinite reinvestment is determined by management’s judgment about, and intentions concerning, our future operations. 52 deferred tax assets represent amounts available to reduce income taxes payable on taxable income in future years. such assets arise because of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, as well as from net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. we evaluate the recoverability of these future tax deductions and credits by assessing the adequacy of future expected taxable income from all sources, including reversal of taxable temporary differences, forecasted operating earnings, and available tax planning strategies. these sources of income rely heavily on estimates that are based on a number of factors, including our historical experience and short-range and long-range business forecasts. to the extent deferred tax assets are not expected to be realized, we record a valuation allowance. we recognize and measure uncertain tax positions in accordance with u.s. gaap, pursuant to which we only recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. the tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50 percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. we report a liability for unrecognized tax benefits resulting from uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. u.s. gaap further requires that a change in judgment related to the expected ultimate resolution of uncertain tax positions be recognized in earnings in the quarter in which such change occurs. we recognize interest and penalties, if any, related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense. we file annual income tax returns in multiple taxing jurisdictions around the world. a number of years may elapse before an uncertain tax position is audited by the relevant tax authorities and finally resolved. while it is often difficult to predict the final outcome or the timing of resolution of any particular uncertain tax position, we believe that our reserves for income taxes are adequate such that we reflect the benefits more likely than not to be sustained in an examination. we adjust these reserves, as well as the related interest and penalties, where appropriate in light of changing facts and circumstances. settlement of any particular position could require the use of cash. based on our results for the year ended december 31, 2021, a one-percentage point increase in our effective tax rate would have resulted in an increase in our income tax expense of approximately $41 million. loss contingencies we are currently involved in various claims, regulatory and legal proceedings, and investigations of potential operating violations by regulatory oversight authorities. we regularly review the status of each significant matter and assess our potential financial exposure. if the potential loss from any claim, legal proceeding, or potential regulatory violation is considered probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated, we accrue a liability for the estimated loss. significant judgment is required in both the determination of probability and whether an exposure is reasonably estimable. our judgments are subjective and are based on the status of the legal or regulatory proceedings, the merits of our defenses, and consultation with in-house and outside legal counsel. because of uncertainties related to these matters, accruals are based on the best information available at the time. as additional information becomes available, we reassess the potential liability related to pending claims, litigation, or other violations and may revise our estimates. due to the inherent uncertainties of the legal and regulatory process in the multiple jurisdictions in which we operate, our judgments may differ materially from the actual outcomes. revenue recognition application of the accounting principles in u.s. gaap related to the measurement and recognition of revenue requires us to make judgments and estimates. complex arrangements with nonstandard terms and conditions may require significant contract interpretation to determine the appropriate accounting. specifically, the determination of whether we are a principal to a transaction (gross revenue) or an agent (net revenue) can require considerable judgment. further, we provide incentive payments to consumers and merchants. evaluating whether these incentives are a payment to a customer, or consideration payable on behalf of a customer, requires judgment. incentives determined to be made to a customer, or payable on behalf of a customer, are recorded as a reduction to gross revenue. changes in judgments with respect to these assumptions and estimates could impact the amount of revenue recognized. valuation of goodwill and intangibles the valuation of assets acquired in a business combination require the use of significant estimates and assumptions. the acquisition method of accounting for business combinations requires us to estimate the fair value of assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling interest in an acquired business to properly allocate purchase price consideration between assets that are depreciated or amortized and goodwill. our estimates are based upon assumptions that we believe to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. these valuations require the use of management’s assumptions, which do not reflect unanticipated events and circumstances that may occur.