item 7. management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations you should read the following “management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations” in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes that appear in this report. unless otherwise expressly stated or the context otherwise requires, references to “we,” “our,” “us,” “the company,” and “paypal” refer to paypal holdings, inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries. this management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations focuses on a discussion of 2024 results as compared to 2023 results. for a discussion of 2023 results as compared to 2022 results, see “item 7. management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations” within our form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2023 filed with the sec on february 8, 2024. business environment the company at paypal, our mission is to revolutionize commerce globally. our products are designed to enable digital payments and simplify commerce experiences for consumers and merchants to make selling, shopping, and sending and receiving money simple, personalized, and secure, online or offline, including mobile. our two-sided platform serves millions of consumers and merchants worldwide. regulatory environment we operate globally and in a rapidly evolving regulatory environment characterized by a heightened focus by regulators globally on all aspects of the payments industry, including anti-money laundering, countering terrorist financing, privacy, cybersecurity, and consumer protection. the laws and regulations applicable to us, including those enacted prior to the advent of digital payments, continue to evolve through legislative and regulatory action and judicial interpretation. new or changing laws and regulations, including changes to their interpretation and implementation, as well as increased penalties and enforcement actions related to non-compliance, could have a material adverse impact on our business, results of operations, and financial condition. we monitor these areas closely and are focused on designing compliant solutions for our customers. cybersecurity and information security cybersecurity and information security risks for global payments and technology companies like us have increased significantly in recent years. although we have developed systems and processes designed to protect the data we manage, prevent data loss and other security incidents, and enable us to effectively respond to known and potential risks, and expect to continue to expend significant resources to bolster these protections, we have experienced and expect to continue to experience cybersecurity incidents and remain subject to these risks. there can be no assurance that our security measures will provide sufficient protection or security to prevent breaches or attacks. for additional information regarding our cybersecurity and information security risks, see “item 1a. risk factors—cyberattacks and security vulnerabilities could result in serious harm to our reputation, business, and financial condition” and “item 1c. cybersecurity.” overview of results of operations the following table provides a summary of our consolidated financial results for the years ended december 31, 2024, 2023, and 2022: year ended december 31,percent increase/(decrease) 20242023202220242023 (in millions, except percentages and per share amounts) net revenues$31,797 $29,771 $27,518 7 %8 % operating expenses26,472 24,743 23,681 7 %4 % operating income5,325 5,028 3,837 6 %31 % operating margin17 %17 %14 %**** other income (expense), net4 383 (471)(99)%181 % income tax expense 1,182 1,165 947 1 %23 % effective tax rate22 %22 %28 %**** net income (loss)$4,147 $4,246 $2,419 (2)%76 % net income (loss) per diluted share$3.99 $3.84 $2.09 4 %84 % net cash provided by operating activities $7,450 $4,843 $5,813 54 %(17)% all amounts in tables are rounded to the nearest million, except as otherwise noted. as a result, certain amounts may not recalculate using the rounded amounts provided. ** not meaningful. net revenues increased $2.0 billion, or 7%, in 2024 compared to 2023 driven primarily by growth in total payment volume (“tpv”, as defined below under “key metrics”) of 10%. total operating expenses increased $1.7 billion, or 7%, in 2024 compared to 2023 due primarily to an increase in transaction expense, and to a lesser extent, restructuring and other, partially offset by a reduction in transaction and credit losses. operating income increased $297 million, or 6%, in 2024 compared to 2023 due to net revenues increasing more than operating expenses. our operating margin remained consistent at 17% for both 2024 and 2023. net income decreased $99 million, or 2%, in 2024 compared to 2023 due to the previously discussed increase in operating income of $297 million and a decrease of $379 million in other income (expense), net, driven primarily by net losses on strategic investments in the current period as compared to net gains on strategic investments in the prior period. impact of foreign exchange rates we have significant international operations that are denominated in foreign currencies, primarily the british pound, euro, australian dollar, and canadian dollar, subjecting us to foreign exchange risk which may adversely impact our financial results. the strengthening or weakening of the united states (“u.s.”) dollar versus foreign currencies in which we conduct our international operations impacts the translation of our net revenues and expenses generated in these foreign currencies into the u.s. dollar. in 2024, 2023, and 2022, we generated approximately 43%, 42%, and 43% of our net revenues from customers domiciled outside of the u.s., respectively. because we generate substantial net revenues internationally, we are subject to the risks of doing business outside of the u.s., including those discussed under “item 1a. risk factors.” we calculate the year-over-year impact of foreign exchange rate movements on our business using prior period foreign exchange rates applied to current period transactional currency amounts. while changes in foreign currency exchange rates affect our reported results, we have a foreign currency exposure management program in which we use foreign exchange contracts, designated as cash flow hedges, intended to reduce the impact on earnings from foreign exchange rate movements. gains and losses from these foreign exchange contracts are recognized as a component of transaction revenues or operating expenses (as applicable) in the same period the forecasted transactions impact earnings. in the years ended december 31, 2024 and 2023, the year-over-year foreign exchange rate movements relative to the u.s. dollar had the following impact on our reported results: year ended december 31, 20242023 (in millions) (unfavorable) favorable impact to net revenues (exclusive of hedging impact) $(18)$128 hedging impact48 111 favorable impact to net revenues 30 239 favorable (unfavorable) impact to operating expense 28 (29) net favorable impact to operating income$58 $210 while we enter into foreign exchange contracts to help reduce the impact on earnings from foreign exchange rate movements, it is impossible to eliminate the total effects of this exposure. we also use foreign exchange contracts, designated as net investment hedges, to reduce the foreign exchange risk related to our investment in certain foreign subsidiaries. gains and losses associated with these instruments will remain in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) until the underlying foreign subsidiaries are sold or substantially liquidated. given that we also have foreign exchange risk on our assets and liabilities denominated in currencies other than the functional currency of our subsidiaries, we have an additional balance sheet foreign currency exposure management program in which we use foreign exchange contracts to help offset the impact of foreign exchange rate movements on our assets and liabilities. the foreign exchange gains and losses on our assets and liabilities are recorded in other income (expense), net, and are offset by the gains and losses on the foreign exchange contracts. these foreign exchange contracts reduce, but do not entirely eliminate, the impact of foreign exchange rate movements on our assets and liabilities. additionally, in connection with transactions occurring in multiple currencies on our payments platform, we generally set our foreign exchange rates daily and may face financial exposure if we incorrectly set our foreign exchange rates or as a result of fluctuations in foreign exchange rates between the times that we set our foreign exchange rates and when transactions occur. while we have processes in place to mitigate these risks, it is impossible to eliminate the total effects of any possible exposure associated with setting foreign exchange rates on our payments platform. key metrics and financial results key metrics tpv, number of payment transactions, active accounts, and number of payment transactions per active account are key non-financial performance metrics (“key metrics”) that management uses to measure the scale of our platform and the relevance of our products and services to our customers, and are defined as follows: •tpv is the value of payments, net of payment reversals, successfully completed on our payments platform or enabled by paypal via a partner payment solution, not including gateway-exclusive transactions. •number of payment transactions is the total number of payments, net of payment reversals, successfully completed on our payments platform or enabled by paypal via a partner payment solution, not including gateway-exclusive transactions. •an active account is an account registered directly with paypal or a platform access partner that has completed a transaction on our platform, not including gateway-exclusive transactions, within the past 12 months. a platform access partner is a third party whose customers are provided access to paypal’s platform or services through such third-party’s login credentials, including individuals and entities that utilize hyperwallet’s payout capabilities. a user may register on our platform to access different products and may register more than one account to access a product. accordingly, a user may have more than one active account. the number of active accounts provides management with additional perspective on the overall scale of our platform, but may not have a direct relationship to our operating results. 34 •number of payment transactions per active account reflects the total number of payment transactions within the previous 12-month period, divided by active accounts at the end of the period. the number of payment transactions per active account provides management with insight into the average number of times an account engages in payments activity on our payments platform in a given period. the number of times a consumer account or a merchant account transacts on our platform may vary significantly from the average number of payment transactions per active account. as our transaction revenue is typically correlated with tpv growth and the number of payment transactions completed on our payments platform, management uses these metrics to gain insights into the scale and strength of our payments platform, the engagement level of our customers, and underlying activity and trends which may be indicators of current and future performance. we present these key metrics to enhance investors’ evaluation of the performance of our business and operating results. our key metrics are calculated using internal company data based on the activity we measure on our payments platform and compiled from multiple systems, including systems that are internally developed or acquired through business combinations. while the measurement of our key metrics is based on what we believe to be reasonable methodologies and estimates, there are inherent challenges and limitations in measuring our key metrics globally at scale. the methodologies used to calculate our key metrics require significant judgment. we regularly review our processes for calculating these key metrics, and from time to time we may make adjustments to improve the accuracy or relevance of our metrics. for example, we continuously apply models, processes, and practices designed to detect and prevent fraudulent account creation on our platforms, and work to improve and enhance those capabilities. when we detect a significant volume of illegitimate activity, we generally remove the activity identified from our key metrics. although such adjustments may impact key metrics reported in prior periods, we generally do not update previously reported key metrics to reflect these subsequent adjustments unless the retrospective impact of process improvements or enhancements is determined by management to be material. net revenues our revenues are classified into the following two categories: •transaction revenues: net transaction fees charged to merchants and consumers on a transaction basis based on the tpv completed on our payments platform. growth in tpv is directly impacted by the number of payment transactions that we enable on our payments platform. we generate additional revenue from merchants and consumers: on transactions where we perform currency conversion, when we enable cross-border transactions (i.e., transactions where the merchant and consumer are in different countries), to facilitate the instant transfer of funds for our customers from their paypal or venmo account to their bank account or debit card, to facilitate the purchase and sale of cryptocurrencies, as contractual compensation from sellers that violate our contractual terms (for example, through fraud or counterfeiting), and other miscellaneous fees. •revenues from other value added services: net revenues derived primarily from revenue earned through partnerships, referral fees, subscription fees, gateway fees, and other services we provide to our consumers and merchants. we also earn revenues from interest and fees earned on our portfolio of loans receivable, and interest earned on certain assets underlying customer balances. our revenues can be significantly impacted by a number of factors, including the following: •the mix of merchants, products, and services; •the mix between domestic and cross-border transactions; •the geographic region or country in which a transaction occurs; and •the amount of our loans receivable outstanding with consumers and merchants. refer to “part i, item 1a, risk factors” in this form 10-k for further discussion on factors that may impact our revenue. 35 net revenue analysis the components of our net revenues for the years ended december 31, 2024, 2023, and 2022 were as follows (in millions): transaction revenues transaction revenues grew $2.0 billion, or 7%, in 2024 compared to 2023 driven primarily by an increase in revenues of approximately $1.3 billion, $0.5 billion, and $0.2 billion from our braintree, core paypal, and venmo products and services, respectively, which resulted from growth in tpv and the number of payment transactions. as a result of ongoing negotiations with merchants, including our stronger focus on profitable growth, we expect lower volume and transaction revenue growth from our braintree offerings in 2025. the graphs below present the respective key metrics (in millions) for the years ended december 31, 2024, 2023, and 2022: *reflects active accounts at the end of the applicable period. the following table provides a summary of related metrics: year ended december 31,percent increase/(decrease) 20242023202220242023 number of payment transactions per active account60.6 58.7 51.4 3 %14 % percent of cross-border tpv(1) 12 %12 %13 %** ** (1) cross-border tpv occurs primarily between two paypal accounts in different countries and includes transactions initiated through our xoom product. ** not meaningful. we had active accounts of 434 million and 426 million as of december 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively, an increase of 2%. number of payment transactions was 26.3 billion and 25.0 billion for the years ended december 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively, an increase of 5%. tpv was $1.68 trillion and $1.53 trillion for the years ended december 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively, an increase of 10%. 36 transaction revenues growth was lower than the growth in tpv in 2024 due primarily to changes in mix from core paypal products and services with a higher volume from large merchants, which have lower pricing. revenues from other value added services revenues from other value added services increased $41 million, or 1%, in 2024 compared to 2023 due primarily to an approximately $380 million increase in interest earned on certain assets underlying customer account balances resulting from higher interest rates and higher customer balances, partially offset by a decline in the revenue of approximately $160 million earned from an independent chartered financial institution (“partner institution”). revenue from the partner institution is earned primarily through our revenue share associated with our u.s. revolving consumer credit product and paypal and venmo branded credit cards. revenues from other value added services were also impacted by an approximately $180 million decline from: lower interest and fee revenue on our paypal business loan (“ppbl”) products, lower revenues from honey, and lower revenues resulting from the sale of happy returns in the forth quarter of 2023. consumers that have outstanding loans and interest receivable due to our partner institution may experience hardships that result in losses recognized by the partner institution, which may result in a decrease in our revenue share earned in future periods. in the event the overall return on the paypal branded credit programs funded by the partner institution does not meet a minimum rate of return (“minimum return threshold”) in a particular quarter, our revenue share for that period would be zero. further, in the event the overall return on the paypal branded credit programs managed by the partner institution does not meet the minimum return threshold as measured over four consecutive quarters and in the following quarter, we would be required to make a payment to the partner institution, subject to certain limitations. through december 31, 2024, the overall return on the paypal branded credit programs funded by the partner institution exceeded the minimum return threshold. seasonality the company does not experience meaningful seasonality with respect to net revenues. no individual quarter in 2024, 2023, or 2022 accounted for more than 30% of annual net revenue. operating expenses the following table summarizes our operating expenses and related metrics we use to assess the trends in each: year ended december 31,percent increase/(decrease) 20242023202220242023 (in millions, except percentages) transaction expense$15,697 $14,385 $12,173 9 %18 % transaction and credit losses1,442 1,682 1,572 (14)%7 % customer support and operations1,768 1,919 2,120 (8)%(9)% sales and marketing2,001 1,809 2,257 11 %(20)% technology and development2,979 2,973 3,253 — %(9)% general and administrative2,147 2,059 2,099 4 %(2)% restructuring and other 438 (84)207 **(141)% total operating expenses$26,472 $24,743 $23,681 7 %4 % transaction expense rate(1) 0.93 %0.94 %0.90 %**** transaction and credit loss rate(2) 0.09 %0.11 %0.12 %**** (1) transaction expense rate is calculated by dividing transaction expense by tpv. (2) transaction and credit loss rate is calculated by dividing transaction and credit losses by tpv. ** not meaningful. 37 transaction expense transaction expense is primarily composed of the costs we incur to accept a customer’s funding source of payment. these costs include fees paid to payment processors and other financial institutions when we draw funds from a customer’s credit or debit card, bank account, or other funding source they have stored in their digital wallet. we refer to the allocation of funding sources used by our consumers as our “funding mix.” the cost of funding a transaction with a credit or debit card is generally higher than the cost of funding a transaction from a bank or through internal sources such as a paypal or venmo account balance or our consumer credit products. as we expand the availability and presentation of alternative funding sources to our customers, our funding mix may change, which could increase or decrease our transaction expense rate. the cost of funding a transaction is also impacted by the geographic region or country in which a transaction occurs, as we generally pay lower rates for transactions funded with credit or debit cards outside the u.s. our transaction expense rate is impacted by changes in product mix, merchant mix, regional mix, funding mix, and fees paid to payment processors and other financial institutions. macroeconomic environment changes may also result in behavioral shifts in consumer spending patterns affecting the type of funding source they use, which could also impact the funding mix. transaction expense increased $1.3 billion, or 9%, in 2024 compared to 2023 due to braintree, which has a higher expense rate than our other products and services, representing a larger portion of tpv. the decrease in transaction expense rate in 2024 compared to 2023 was attributable to favorable changes in regional mix, product mix, and certain third-party pricing incentives within our core paypal products and services. for the years ended december 31, 2024, 2023, and 2022, approximately 37%, 36%, and 35% of tpv, respectively, was generated outside of the u.s. transaction and credit losses transaction losses include the expense associated with our customer protection programs, fraud, and chargebacks. credit losses include the current expected credit losses associated with our consumer and merchant loans receivable portfolio. our transaction and credit losses fluctuate depending on many factors, including tpv, product mix, current and projected macroeconomic conditions such as unemployment rates, retail e-commerce sales and household disposable income, merchant insolvency events, changes to and usage of our customer protection programs, the impact of regulatory changes, and the credit quality of loans receivable arising from transactions funded with our credit products for consumers and loans and advances to merchants. estimating our current expected credit loss allowances for our loans receivable portfolios is an inherently uncertain process and the ultimate losses we incur may vary from the current estimates. we regularly update our allowance estimates as new facts become known and events occur that may impact the ultimate losses incurred. a deterioration in macroeconomic conditions or other factors beyond those considered in our estimates could result in credit losses that exceed our current estimated credit losses and adversely impact our future operating results. 38 the components of our transaction and credit losses for the years ended december 31, 2024, 2023, and 2022 were as follows (in millions): transaction and credit losses decreased $240 million, or 14%, in 2024 compared to 2023. transaction losses were approximately $1.1 billion and $1.2 billion for 2024 and 2023, respectively, reflecting a decrease of $78 million, or 7%. transaction loss rate (transaction losses divided by tpv) was 0.07%, 0.08%, and 0.09% for the years ended december 31, 2024, 2023, and 2022, respectively. the decrease in transaction losses and the associated transaction loss rate in 2024 was primarily due to lower losses from our venmo products and services resulting from enhanced risk mitigation strategies. credit losses decreased $162 million in 2024 compared to 2023. the components of credit losses for the years ended december 31, 2024, 2023, and 2022 were as follows (in millions): year ended december 31, 20242023(3) 2022 net charge-offs(1) $372 $549 $267 reserve (release) build(2) (44)(59)135 credit losses$328 $490 $402 (1) net charge-offs includes principal charge-offs partially offset by recoveries for consumer and merchant receivables. (2) reserve (release) build represents change in allowance for principal receivables excluding foreign currency remeasurement. (3) includes changes in the allowance due to the reclassification of loans and interest receivable to or from held for sale. credit losses in the year ended december 31, 2024 were primarily attributable to loan originations during the period partially offset by improvement in the credit quality of loans outstanding. credit losses in the year ended december 31, 2023 were primarily attributable to loan originations during the period and a deterioration in the credit quality of loans outstanding. consumer loan portfolio in june 2023, we entered into a multi-year agreement with a global investment firm to sell united kingdom (“u.k.”) and other european buy now, pay later loan receivables, consisting of eligible loans and interest receivables, including a forward-flow arrangement for the sale of future originations of eligible loans over a 24-month commitment period (collectively, “eligible consumer installment receivables”). in december 2024, this agreement was amended and restated to extend the commitment period to december 2026 and to increase the maximum balance of loans that can be sold at a time. for additional information, see “note 1—overview and summary of significant accounting policies” in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this form 10-k. as of december 31, 2024 and 2023, loans and interest receivable, held for sale was $541 million and $563 million, respectively. 39 the consumer loans and interest receivable balance as of december 31, 2024 and 2023 was $5.4 billion and $4.8 billion, respectively, net of participation interest sold, reflecting an increase of 13%. the increase was driven primarily by growth of approximately $390 million and $250 million in our installment credit products driven by growth in japan and the u.s., respectively, as well as growth of approximately $170 million in our revolving credit product in the u.k., partially offset by a decline of approximately $180 million in our installment credit products in germany due to the forward-flow arrangement with the global investment firm. the following table provides information regarding the credit quality of our consumer loans and interest receivable balance: december 31, 20242023 percent of consumer loans and interest receivable current 96.6 %95.4 % percent of consumer loans and interest receivable > 90 days outstanding(1) 1.6 %2.2 % net charge-off rate(2) 4.5 %7.2 % (1) represents percentage of balances which are 90 days past the billing date or contractual repayment date, as applicable. (2) net charge-off rate is the annualized ratio of net credit losses during the three months ended december 31, 2024, excluding fraud losses, on consumer loans as a percentage of the average daily amount of consumer loans and interest receivable balance during the same period. the decline in net charge-off rate for consumer receivables at december 31, 2024 as compared to december 31, 2023 was due primarily to the improvement in credit quality of the u.s. interest-bearing installment products. in response to changing portfolio performance and macroeconomic environment, we continue to monitor risk and evaluate and modify our acceptable risk parameters. changes to such parameters in 2024 resulted in an increase of u.s. interest-bearing installment loan originations in 2024. merchant loan portfolio we offer access to merchant finance products for certain small and medium-sized businesses, which we refer to as our merchant finance offerings. total merchant loans, advances, and interest and fees receivable outstanding, net of participation interest sold, as of december 31, 2024 and 2023 was $1.5 billion and $1.2 billion, respectively, reflecting an increase of 23%. the increase was due primarily to growth of approximately $170 million in our paypal working capital (“ppwc”) product portfolio, primarily from the u.s., germany and the u.k., as well as growth of approximately $110 million in our ppbl product in the u.s. the following table provides information regarding the credit quality of our merchant loans, advances, and interest and fees receivable balance: december 31, 20242023 percent of merchant loans, advances, and interest and fees receivable current90.4 %87.0 % percent of merchant loans, advances, and interest and fees receivable > 90 days outstanding(1) 2.8 %5.6 % net charge-off rate (2) 5.3 %18.8 % (1) represents percentage of balances which are 90 days past the original expected or contractual repayment period, as applicable. (2) net charge-off rate is the annualized ratio of net credit losses during the three months ended december 31, 2024, excluding fraud losses, on merchant loans and advances as a percentage of the average daily amount of merchant loans, advances, and interest and fees receivable balance during the same period. the increase in the percent of current merchant receivables and decrease in percent of merchant receivables greater than 90 days outstanding and the net charge-off rate for merchant receivables at december 31, 2024 as compared to december 31, 2023 was due primarily to the improvement in underwriting and credit quality of the ppbl portfolio. in response to changing portfolio performance and macroeconomic environment, we continue to monitor risk and evaluate and modify our acceptable risk parameters. changes to such parameters resulted in an increase in ppbl originations in 2024. for additional information, see “note 11—loans and interest receivable” in the notes to the consolidated financial statements, and “item 1a. risk factors—our credit products expose us to additional risks” included in this form 10-k. 40 customer support and operations customer support and operations includes costs incurred in our global customer operations centers, including costs to provide call support to our customers, costs to support our trust and security programs protecting our consumers and merchants, and other costs incurred related to the delivery of our products, including payment devices, card production, and customer onboarding and compliance costs. customer support and operations expenses decreased $151 million, or 8%, in 2024 compared to 2023 due primarily to a decline in employee-related costs of approximately $100 million associated with a headcount reduction. the decline in customer support and operations expenses year-over-year was also impacted by a reduction in other costs incurred related to delivery of our products, including warehouses, shipping, and payment devices and a decrease in contractors and consulting costs, partially offset by an increase in customer onboarding and compliance costs and card issuance costs. sales and marketing sales and marketing includes costs incurred for customer acquisition, business development, advertising, and marketing programs. sales and marketing expenses increased $192 million, or 11%, in 2024 compared to 2023 due primarily to higher spend of approximately $260 million on marketing and brand advertising, including the launch of our paypal everywhere advertising campaign, partially offset by a decline in employee-related costs. 41 technology and development technology and development includes costs incurred in connection with the development of our payments platform, new products, and the improvement of our existing products, including the amortization of software and website development costs incurred in developing our payments platform, which are capitalized. it also includes acquired developed technology and our site operations and other infrastructure costs incurred to support our payments platform. technology and development expenses remained consistent in 2024 compared to 2023 due primarily to a decline in employee-related costs associated with headcount reduction offset by an increase in costs related to contractors and consultants and software maintenance costs. general and administrative general and administrative includes costs incurred to provide support to our business, including legal, human resources, finance, risk and compliance, executive, and other support operations. general and administrative expenses increased $88 million, or 4%, in 2024 compared to 2023 due primarily to an increase in professional services expense, a contingency reserve, and indirect tax expense, partially offset by a decline in depreciation expense and facilities costs. restructuring and other restructuring and other primarily consist of restructuring expenses, asset impairment charges, gain on sale of divested business, and losses on loans and interest receivable, held for sale. 42 restructuring and other increased $522 million in 2024 compared to 2023 primarily resulting from restructuring charges and fair value adjustments on loans and interest receivable, held for sale and a gain on sale of a divested business, in which we recorded a pre-tax gain of $339 million in 2023 with no comparable activity in the current period. during the first quarter of 2024, management initiated a global workforce reduction intended to streamline operations, focus resources on core strategic priorities, and improve our cost structure. the associated restructuring charges during the year ended december 31, 2024 were $307 million and included employee severance and benefits costs and stock-based compensation expense, which were substantially completed by the fourth quarter of 2024. the estimated reduction in annualized employee-related costs associated with the impacted workforce is approximately $575 million, including approximately $165 million in stock-based compensation. we reinvested a portion of the reduction in annual costs associated with the impacted workforce to drive business priorities. during the first quarter of 2023, management initiated a global workforce reduction intended to focus resources on core strategic priorities, and improve our cost structure and operating efficiency. the associated restructuring charges during the year ended december 31, 2023 were $122 million. we primarily incurred employee severance and benefits costs, which were substantially completed in the fourth quarter of 2023. for information on the associated restructuring liabilities, see “note 17—restructuring and other” in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this form 10-k. we continue to review our real estate and facility capacity requirements due to our new and evolving work models. we incurred asset impairment charges of nil and $61 million in the years ended december 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively, due to exiting certain leased properties, which resulted in a reduction of right-of-use lease assets and related leasehold improvements. in the year ended december 31, 2023, we recognized a gain of $17 million due to the sale of an owned property. we also incurred a loss of $14 million related to another owned property, which was previously held for sale, in the year ended december 31, 2023. during the years ended december 31, 2024 and 2023, approximately $129 million and $74 million of losses were recorded in restructuring and other, which included net loss on sale of loans and interest receivable previously held for sale (inclusive of transaction costs) and fair value adjustments to measure loans and interest receivable, held for sale, at the lower of cost or fair value. other income (expense), net other income (expense), net of $4 million in 2024 decreased $379 million compared to $383 million in 2023. this decline in other income (expense), net was due primarily to net losses and impairments on strategic investments in the current period compared to net gains in the prior period, which contributed a decline of approximately $490 million year-over-year, partially offset by an increase in interest income of approximately $180 million resulting from an increase in average cash balances and interest rates year-over-year. income tax expense our effective income tax rate was 22% in both 2024 and 2023. our effective income tax rate in 2024 remained consistent compared to 2023 and was impacted primarily by changes in jurisdictional mix of income, u.s. income taxed at different rates, discrete tax adjustments, and tax expense in prior period associated with sale of a divested business. see “note 16—income taxes” to the consolidated financial statements included in this form 10-k for more information on our effective tax rate. liquidity and capital resources we require liquidity and access to capital to fund our global operations, including our customer protection programs, credit products, capital expenditures, investments in our business, potential acquisitions and strategic investments, working capital, and other cash needs. we believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents, and investments, cash expected to be generated from operations, and our expected access to capital markets, together with potential external funding through third-party sources, will be sufficient to meet our cash requirements within the next 12 months and beyond. 43 sources of liquidity cash, cash equivalents, and investments the following table summarizes our cash, cash equivalents, and investments as of december 31, 2024 and 2023: year ended december 31, 20242023 (in millions) cash, cash equivalents, and investments(1)(2) $13,846 $15,493 (1) excludes assets related to funds receivable and customer accounts of $37.7 billion and $38.9 billion as of december 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively. (2) excludes total restricted cash of $1 million and $3 million at december 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively, and strategic investments of $1.6 billion and $1.8 billion at december 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively. cash, cash equivalents, and investments held by our foreign subsidiaries were $8.5 billion at december 31, 2024 and $10.0 billion at december 31, 2023, or 62% and 64%, of our total cash, cash equivalents, and investments as of those respective dates. at december 31, 2024, all of our cash, cash equivalents, and investments held by foreign subsidiaries were subject to u.s. taxation under subpart f, global intangible low taxed income (“gilti”) or the one-time transition tax under the tax cuts and jobs act of 2017 (“tax act”). subsequent repatriations to the u.s. will not be taxable from a u.s. federal tax perspective except for any tax on foreign exchange gains and losses; however, they may be subject to state income or foreign withholding tax. a significant aspect of our global cash management activities involves meeting our customers’ requirements to access their cash while simultaneously meeting our regulatory financial ratio commitments in various jurisdictions. our global cash balances are required not only to provide operational liquidity to our businesses, but also to support our global regulatory requirements across our regulated subsidiaries. accordingly, not all of our cash is available for general corporate purposes. cash flows the following table summarizes our consolidated statements of cash flows: year ended december 31, 202420232022 (in millions) net cash provided by (used in): operating activities $7,450 $4,843 $5,813 investing activities 1,589 752 (3,328) financing activities (8,276)(2,993)(1,203) effect of exchange rates on cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash(207)76 (155) net change in cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash $556 $2,678 $1,127 operating activities cash flows from operating activities includes net income adjusted for certain non-cash expenses, timing differences between expenses recognized for provision for transaction and credit losses and actual cash transaction losses incurred, originations and proceeds from repayments and sales of loans and interest receivable held for sale, and changes in other assets and liabilities. significant non-cash expenses for the period include depreciation and amortization and stock-based compensation. the cash impact from actual transaction losses incurred during a period is reflected as changes in other assets and liabilities. the expenses recognized during the period for provision for credit losses are estimates of current expected credit losses on our consumer and merchant credit products. actual charge-offs of receivables related to our consumer and merchant credit products have no impact on cash from operating activities. net cash provided by operating activities grew $2.6 billion in 2024 compared to 2023 due primarily to changes in deferred taxes of approximately $900 million, changes in working capital of approximately $760 million, an increase of approximately $530 million in sales and repayments of loans receivable held for sale, net of originations, and an impact of approximately $490 million from losses on strategic investments. cash paid for income taxes, net in 2024, 2023, and 2022 was $1.0 billion, $2.1 billion, and $878 million, respectively. 44 investing activities cash flows from investing activities includes purchases, maturities and sales of investments; cash paid for acquisitions and strategic investments; purchases and sales of property and equipment; purchases, originations, sales, and principal repayment of loans receivable, originally classified as held for investment; changes in funds receivable; changes in collateral posted related to derivative instruments, net; and purchases and maturities of reverse repurchase agreements. net cash provided by investing activities increased $837 million in 2024 compared to 2023 due primarily to an increase of $5.9 billion from changes related to funds receivable, partially offset by a decrease of $3.0 billion in sales and repayments of loans receivables, net of purchases and originations, and an increase of $1.6 billion in purchases of investments, net of sales and maturities. financing activities cash flows from financing activities includes proceeds from issuance of common stock, purchases of treasury stock, tax withholdings related to net share settlements of equity awards, borrowings and repayments under financing arrangements, changes in funds payable and amounts due to customers, changes in collateral received related to derivative instruments, net, and borrowings and repayments under repurchase agreements. net cash used in financing activities increased $5.3 billion in 2024 compared to 2023 due primarily to a decrease of $3.8 billion from changes related to funds payable and amounts due to customers, an increase of $1.0 billion in share repurchases of our common stock, and an increase of approximately $590 million in repayments, net of borrowings under financing arrangements. effect of exchange rates on cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash foreign exchange rates had a negative impact of $207 million and positive impact of $76 million on cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash during 2024 and 2023, respectively. the negative impact in 2024 was primarily due to unfavorable fluctuations in the exchange rate of the u.s. dollar to the australian dollar and, to a lesser extent, the british pound and euro. the positive impact in 2023 was primarily due to favorable fluctuations in the exchange rate of the u.s. dollar to the british pound. available credit and debt in june 2023, we entered into a credit agreement (the “credit agreement”) that provides for an unsecured $5.0 billion, five-year revolving credit facility. the credit agreement includes a $150 million letter of credit sub-facility and a $600 million swingline sub-facility, with available borrowings under the revolving credit facility reduced by the amount of any letters of credit and swingline borrowings outstanding from time to time. as of december 31, 2024, no borrowings were outstanding under the credit agreement and as such, $5.0 billion of borrowing capacity was available for the purposes permitted by the credit agreement, subject to customary conditions to borrowing. in february 2022, we entered into a credit agreement (the “paidy credit agreement”) with paidy as co-borrower, which provided for an unsecured revolving credit facility of ¥60.0 billion, which was modified in september 2022 to increase the borrowing capacity by ¥30.0 billion for a total borrowing capacity of ¥90.0 billion (approximately $574 million as of december 31, 2024). in the year ended december 31, 2024, ¥90.0 billion (approximately $574 million) was drawn down under the paidy credit agreement. accordingly, at december 31, 2024, no borrowing capacity was available under the paidy credit agreement. we maintain uncommitted credit facilities in various regions throughout the world with a borrowing capacity of approximately $80 million in the aggregate, where we can withdraw and utilize the funds at our discretion for general corporate purposes. as of december 31, 2024, substantially all of the borrowing capacity under these credit facilities was available, subject to customary conditions to borrowing. in may 2024, june 2023, may 2022, may 2020 and september 2019, we issued fixed rate notes with varying maturity dates (collectively referred to as the “notes”). proceeds from the issuance of these notes may be used for general corporate purposes, which may include funding the repayment or redemption of outstanding debt, share repurchases, ongoing operations, capital expenditures, and possible acquisitions of businesses, assets, or strategic investments. as of december 31, 2024, we had an aggregate principal amount of $10.6 billion in fixed rate debt outstanding with varying maturity dates. for additional information, see “note 12—debt” to our consolidated financial statements included in this form 10-k. 45 depending on market conditions, we may from time to time issue debt, including in private or public offerings, to fund our operating activities, finance acquisitions, make strategic investments, repurchase shares under our stock repurchase program, or reduce our cost of capital. credit ratings as of december 31, 2024, we continue to be rated investment grade by standard and poor’s financial services, llc, fitch ratings, inc., and moody’s investors services, inc. we expect that these credit rating agencies will continue to monitor our performance, including our capital structure and results of operations. our goal is to be rated investment grade, but as circumstances change, there are factors that could result in our credit ratings being downgraded or put on a watch list for possible downgrading. if that were to occur, it could increase our borrowing rates, including the interest rate on borrowings under our credit agreements. current and future cash requirements our material cash requirements include funds to support current and potential: operating activities, credit products, customer protection programs, stock repurchases, strategic investments, acquisitions, other commitments, capital expenditures, and other future obligations. credit products growth in our portfolio of loans receivable increases our liquidity needs, and any inability to meet those liquidity needs could adversely affect our business. we continue to evaluate partnerships and third-party sources of funding for our credit products. the luxembourg commission de surveillance du secteur financier (the “cssf”) has agreed that paypal’s management may designate up to 50% of european customer balances held in our luxembourg banking subsidiary to fund european, u.k., and u.s. credit activities. as of december 31, 2024 and 2023, the cumulative amount approved by paypal to be designated to fund credit activities was $2.0 billion and $3.0 billion, respectively, and represented approximately 26% and 39% of european customer balances made available for our corporate use as of those respective dates, as determined by applying financial regulations maintained by the cssf. we may periodically seek to change the designation of amounts of european customer balances for our credit activities, as we deem necessary, based on utilization of the approved funds and anticipated credit funding requirements. under certain exceptional circumstances, corporate liquidity could be called upon to meet our obligations related to our european customer balances. in june 2023, we entered into a multi-year agreement with a global investment firm to sell our eligible consumer installment receivables portfolio. in december 2024, this agreement was amended and restated to extend the commitment period to december 2026 and to increase the maximum balance of loans that can be sold at a time. during the years ended december 31, 2024 and 2023, we sold $20.8 billion and $5.5 billion, respectively, of loans and interest receivable in connection with this agreement. for additional information, see “note 1—overview and summary of significant accounting policies” to our consolidated financial statements included in this form 10-k. while our objective is to expand the availability of our credit products with capital from external sources, there can be no assurance that we will be successful in achieving that goal. customer protection programs the risk of losses from our customer protection programs are specific to individual consumers, merchants, and transactions, and may also be impacted by regional variations in, and changes or modifications to, the programs, including as a result of changes in regulatory requirements. for the periods presented in these consolidated financial statements included in this report, our transaction loss rate ranged between 0.07% and 0.09% of tpv. historical loss rates may not be indicative of future results. stock repurchases during the year ended december 31, 2024, we repurchased approximately $6.0 billion of our common stock in the open market under our stock repurchase program authorized in june 2022. as of december 31, 2024, a total of approximately $4.9 billion remained available for future repurchases of our common stock under our june 2022 stock repurchase program. for additional information, see “note 14—stock repurchase programs” to our consolidated financial statements included in this form 10-k. 46 future obligations we have certain fixed contractual obligations and commitments that include future estimated payments for general operating purposes. changes in our business needs, contractual cancellation provisions, fluctuating interest rates, and other factors may result in actual payments differing from our estimates. we cannot provide certainty regarding the timing and amounts of these payments. the following table summarizes our obligations as of december 31, 2024 that are expected to impact liquidity and cash flow in future periods. we believe we will be able to fund these obligations through our existing cash and investment portfolio and cash expected to be generated from operations. purchaseobligationsleases transition taxlong-term debttotal payments due during the year ending december 31,(in millions) 2025$849 $171 354 $1,542 $2,916 2026578 177 — 1,738 2,493 2027131 159 — 797 1,087 202811 109 — 522 642 20293 88 — 1,785 1,876 thereafter5 198 — 9,263 9,466 $1,577 $902 $354 $15,647 $18,480 the significant assumptions used in our determination of amounts presented in the above table are as follows: •purchase obligation amounts include minimum purchase commitments for cloud computing services, advertising, and other goods and services entered into in the ordinary course of business. •lease amounts include primarily minimum rental payments under our non-cancelable operating leases primarily for office and data center facilities. the amounts presented are consistent with contractual terms and are not expected to differ significantly from actual results under our existing leases, unless a substantial change in our headcount needs requires us to expand our occupied space or exit an office facility early. •transition tax represents the one-time mandatory tax on previously deferred foreign earnings under the tax act. •long-term debt amounts represent the future principal and interest payments (based on contractual interest rates) on our fixed-rate debt. for more information, see “note 12—debt” to our consolidated financial statements included in this form 10-k. as we are unable to reasonably predict the timing of settlement of liabilities related to unrecognized tax benefits, net, the table above does not include $2.6 billion recorded in other long-term liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets as of december 31, 2024. other considerations our liquidity, access to capital, and borrowing costs could be adversely impacted by declines in our credit rating, our financial performance, and global credit market conditions, as well as a broad range of other factors. in addition, our liquidity, access to capital, and borrowing costs could also be negatively impacted by the outcome of any of the legal or regulatory proceedings to which we are a party. see “item 1a. risk factors” and “note 13—commitments and contingencies” to our consolidated financial statements included in this form 10-k for additional discussion of these and other risks that our business faces. 47 critical accounting policies and estimates the application of u.s. generally accepted accounting principles (“gaap”) requires us to make estimates and assumptions about certain items and future events that directly affect our reported financial condition. we have established detailed policies and control procedures to provide reasonable assurance that the methods used to make estimates and assumptions are well controlled and are applied consistently from period to period. the accounting estimates and assumptions discussed in this section are those that we consider to be the most critical to our financial statements. an accounting estimate or assumption is considered critical if both (a) the nature of the estimate or assumption is material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment involved, and (b) the impact within a reasonable range of outcomes of the estimate and assumption is material to our financial condition. management has discussed the development, selection, and disclosure of these estimates with the audit, risk, and compliance committee of our board of directors. our significant accounting policies, including recent accounting pronouncements, are described in “note 1—overview and summary of significant accounting policies” to the consolidated financial statements included in this form 10‑k. a quantitative sensitivity analysis is provided where information is reasonably available, can be reliably estimated, and provides material information to investors. the amounts used to assess sensitivity are included to allow users of this report to understand a general directional cause and effect of changes in the estimates and do not represent management’s predictions of variability. for all of these estimates, it should be noted that future events rarely develop exactly as forecasted, and such estimates require regular review and adjustment. allowance for transaction and credit losses transaction and credit losses include the expense associated with our customer protection programs, fraud, chargebacks, and credit losses associated with our loans receivable balances. our transaction and credit losses fluctuate depending on many factors, including: total tpv, product mix, current and projected macroeconomic conditions, merchant insolvency events, changes to and usage of our customer protection programs, the impact of regulatory changes, and the credit quality of loans receivable arising from transactions funded with our credit products, which include revolving and installment credit products offered to consumers at checkout, as well as merchant loans and advances arising from the ppwc and ppbl products. we establish allowances for negative customer balances and estimated transaction losses arising from processing customer transactions, such as chargebacks for unauthorized credit card use and merchant-related chargebacks due to non-delivery or unsatisfactory delivery of purchased items, purchase protection program claims, account takeovers, and bank returns and reversals. additions to the allowance, in the form of provisions, are reflected in transaction and credit losses on our consolidated statements of income (loss). the allowances are based on known facts and circumstances, internal factors including experience with similar cases, historical trends involving collection and write-off patterns, and the mix of transaction and loss types, as well as current and projected macroeconomic factors, as appropriate. we also establish an allowance for loans and interest receivable, which represents our estimate of current expected credit losses inherent in our portfolio of loans and interest receivable and includes expected credit losses from modifications of receivables to borrowers experiencing financial difficulty. determining appropriate current expected credit loss allowances for loans and interest receivable is an inherently uncertain process and ultimate losses may vary from the current estimates. we regularly update our allowance estimates as new facts become known and events occur that may impact the settlement or recovery of losses. the allowances are maintained at a level we deem appropriate to adequately provide for current expected credit losses at the balance sheet date after incorporating the impact of externally sourced macroeconomic forecasts. as of december 31, 2024 and 2023, we utilized externally published projections of forecasted u.s. unemployment rates, forecasted u.s. and u.k. retail e-commerce sales, and forecasted u.k. household disposable income, among others, over the reasonable and supportable forecast period. the overall principal and interest coverage ratio as of december 31, 2024 and 2023 was approximately 7% and 9%, respectively. a significant change in the forecasted macroeconomic factors could result in a material change in our allowances. an increase of 1% in the principal and interest coverage ratio would increase our allowances by approximately $69 million based on the loans and interest receivable balance outstanding as of december 31, 2024. 48 accounting for income taxes our annual tax rate is based on our income, statutory tax rates, and tax planning opportunities available to us in the various jurisdictions in which we operate. tax laws are complex and subject to different interpretations by the taxpayer and respective government taxing authorities. significant judgment is required in determining our tax expense and in evaluating our tax positions, including evaluating uncertainties. we review our tax positions quarterly and adjust the balances as new information becomes available. our income tax rate is significantly affected by the tax rates that apply to our foreign earnings. in addition to local country tax laws and regulations, our income tax rate depends on the extent that our foreign earnings are taxed by the u.s. through provisions such as the gilti tax and base erosion anti-abuse tax. deferred tax assets represent amounts available to reduce income taxes payable on taxable income in future years. such assets arise because of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, as well as from net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. we evaluate the recoverability of these future tax deductions and credits by assessing the adequacy of future expected taxable income from all sources, including reversal of taxable temporary differences, forecasted operating earnings, and available tax planning strategies. these sources of income rely heavily on estimates that are based on a number of factors, including our historical experience and short-range and long-range business forecasts. to the extent deferred tax assets are not expected to be realized, we record a valuation allowance. we recognize and measure uncertain tax positions in accordance with u.s. gaap, pursuant to which we only recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. the tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50 percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. we report a liability for unrecognized tax benefits resulting from uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. u.s. gaap further requires that a change in judgment related to the expected ultimate resolution of uncertain tax positions be recognized in earnings in the quarter in which such change occurs. we recognize interest and penalties, if any, related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense. we file annual income tax returns in multiple taxing jurisdictions around the world. a number of years may elapse before an uncertain tax position is audited by the relevant tax authorities and finally resolved. while it is often difficult to predict the final outcome or the timing of resolution of any particular uncertain tax position, we believe that our reserves for income taxes are adequate. we adjust these reserves, as well as the related interest and penalties, where appropriate in light of changing facts and circumstances. settlement of any particular position could require the use of cash. based on our results for the year ended december 31, 2024, an increase in our income tax expense of $53 million would have resulted in a one-percentage point increase in our effective tax rate. loss contingencies we are regularly involved in various claims, regulatory and legal proceedings, and investigations of potential violations by regulatory oversight authorities. on a regular basis, we review the status of each significant matter and assess our potential financial exposure. if the potential loss from any claim, legal proceeding, or potential regulatory violation is considered probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated, we accrue a liability for the estimated loss. significant judgment is required in both the determination of probability and whether an exposure is reasonably estimable. our judgments are subjective and are based on the status of the legal or regulatory proceedings, the merits of our defenses, and consultation with in-house and outside legal counsel. because of uncertainties related to these matters, accruals are based on the best information available at the time. as additional information becomes available, we reassess the potential liability related to pending claims, litigation, or other violations and may revise our estimates. due to the inherent uncertainties of legal and regulatory processes in the multiple jurisdictions in which we operate, our judgments may differ materially from the actual outcomes. 49 revenue recognition application of the accounting principles in u.s. gaap related to the measurement and recognition of revenue requires us to make judgments and estimates. complex arrangements with nonstandard terms and conditions may require significant contract interpretation to determine the appropriate accounting. specifically, the determination of whether we are a principal to a transaction (gross revenue) or an agent (net revenue) can require considerable judgment. further, we provide incentive payments to consumers and merchants. evaluating whether these incentives are a payment to a customer, or consideration payable on behalf of a customer, requires judgment. incentives determined to be made to a customer, or payable on behalf of a customer, are recorded as a reduction to gross revenue. incentives that are earned by the customer based on performance targets are recorded when earned, based on management’s estimate of each customer’s future performance. these accruals are regularly reviewed and estimates of performance are adjusted, as appropriate, based on changes in performance expectations, actual customer performance, amendments to existing contracts, or the execution of new contracts. changes in judgments with respect to these assumptions and estimates could impact the amount of revenue recognized. evaluation of strategic investments for impairment we have strategic investments in non-marketable equity securities, which include investments that do not have a readily determinable fair value and are measured at cost minus impairment, if any, and are adjusted for changes resulting from observable price changes in orderly transactions for an identical or similar investment in the same issuer (the measurement alternative). we review these investments regularly to determine if impairment has occurred. we assess whether an impairment loss on these non-marketable equity securities, which are primarily investments in privately held companies, has occurred based on qualitative factors such as the companies’ financial condition and business outlook, industry performance, regulatory, economic or technological environment, and other relevant events and factors affecting the company. when indicators of impairment exist, we estimate the fair value of these non-marketable equity securities using the market approach and/or the income approach. if any impairment is identified, we write down the investment to its fair value and record the corresponding charge through other income (expense), net on our consolidated statements of income (loss). estimating fair value requires judgment and use of estimates such as discount rates, forecasted cash flows, and market data of comparable companies, among others. for sensitivity analysis performed on our strategic investments, see “item 7a. quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk—equity investment risk.”