swks-20240927 0000004127 true no. 1 2024 fy --09-27 true iso4217:usd iso4217:usd xbrli:shares xbrli:shares 0000004127 2023-09-30 2024-09-27 0000004127 2024-03-29 0000004127 2025-01-17 united states securities and exchange commission washington, d.c. 20549 form 10-k/a amendment no. 1 annual report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 for the fiscal year ended september 27, 2024 or transition report pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 for the transition period from __________to__________ commission file number 001-05560 skyworks solutions, inc. (exact name of registrant as specified in its charter) delaware 04-2302115 (state or other jurisdiction of incorporation or organization) (i.r.s. employer identification no.) 5260 california avenue 92617 irvine , california (address of principal executive offices) (zip code) (949) 231-3000 (registrant s telephone number, including area code) securities registered pursuant to section 12(b) of the act: title of each class trading symbol(s) name of each exchange on which registered common stock, par value $0.25 per share swks nasdaq global select market securities registered pursuant to section 12(g) of the act: none indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in rule 405 of the securities act. yes o no indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to section 13 or 15(d) of the act. o yes no indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. yes o no indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically every interactive data file required to be submitted pursuant to rule 405 of regulation s-t ( 232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit such files). yes o no indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, a smaller reporting company, or an emerging growth company. see the definitions of large accelerated filer, accelerated filer, smaller reporting company, and emerging growth company, in rule 12b-2 of the exchange act. large accelerated filer accelerated filer non-accelerated filer smaller reporting company emerging growth company if an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the extended transition period for complying with any new or revised financial accounting standards provided pursuant to section 13(a) of the exchange act. o indicate by check mark whether the registrant has filed a report on and attestation to its management s assessment of the effectiveness of its internal control over financial reporting under section 404(b) of the sarbanes-oxley act (15 u.s.c. 7262(b)) by the registered public accounting firm that prepared or issued its audit report. if securities are registered pursuant to section 12(b) of the act, indicate by check mark whether the financial statements of the registrant included in the filing reflect the correction of an error to previously issued financial statements. indicate by check mark whether any of those error corrections are restatements that required a recovery analysis of incentive-based compensation received by any of the registrant s executive officers during the relevant recovery period pursuant to 240.10d-1(b). indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in rule 12b-2 of the exchange act). yes no the aggregate market value of the registrant s common stock held by non-affiliates of the registrant (based on the closing price of the registrant s common stock as reported on the nasdaq global select market on march 29, 2024, the last business day of the registrant s most recently completed second fiscal quarter) was approximately $ 17.3 billion. the number of outstanding shares of the registrant s common stock, par value $ 0.25 per share, as of january 17, 2025, was 160,741,022 . 1 explanatory note this amendment no. 1 amends the annual report on form 10-k of skyworks solutions, inc. ( skyworks or the company ), for the year ended september 27, 2024 , which was filed with the securities and exchange commission ( sec ) on november 15, 2024 (the original filing ). the company is filing this amendment no. 1 for the sole purpose of providing the information required in part iii of form 10-k, as the company s 2025 annual meeting of stockholders is scheduled for may 14, 2025, and, accordingly, the company s proxy statement relating to such annual meeting will be filed after the date hereof. except as described above, this amendment no. 1 does not amend any other information set forth in the original filing, and the company has not updated disclosures included therein to reflect any subsequent events. 2 part iii item 10. directors, executive officers and corporate governance. directors and executive officers the following table sets forth for each director and executive officer of the company his or her position with the company as of january 17, 2025: name title liam k. griffin chairman of the board, chief executive officer and president christine king lead independent director alan s. batey director kevin l. beebe director eric j. guerin director suzanne e. mcbride director david p. mcglade director robert a. schriesheim director maryann turcke director carlos s. bori senior vice president, sales and marketing karilee a. durham senior vice president, human resources reza kasnavi senior vice president, technology and manufacturing kris sennesael senior vice president and chief financial officer robert j. terry senior vice president, general counsel and secretary directors liam k. griffin , age 58, is chairman, chief executive officer and president of the company. prior to his appointment as chairman of the board in may 2021, mr. griffin had served as chief executive officer and a director since may 2016 and as president since may 2014. he served as executive vice president and corporate general manager from november 2012 to may 2014, executive vice president and general manager, high performance analog from may 2011 to november 2012, and senior vice president, sales and marketing from august 2001 to may 2011. previously, mr. griffin was employed by vectron international, a division of dover corp., as vice president of worldwide sales from 1997 to 2001 and as vice president of north american sales from 1995 to 1997. other public company boards current none past 5 years national instruments corporation (until 2023) qualifications: we believe that mr. griffin s qualifications to serve as a director include his strong relationships with skyworks key customers, investors, employees, and other stakeholders, as well as his deep understanding of the semiconductor industry and its competitive landscape gained through serving in several different executive positions at skyworks over the past two decades. 3 christine king , age 75, has been a director since 2014 and lead independent director since 2019. ms. king served as executive chairman of qlogic corporation (a publicly traded developer of high performance server and storage networking connectivity products) from august 2015 until august 2016, when it was acquired by cavium, inc. previously, she served as chief executive officer of standard microsystems corporation ( standard microsystems ) (a publicly traded developer of silicon-based integrated circuits utilizing analog and mixed-signal technologies) from 2008 until the company s acquisition in 2012 by microchip technology, inc. prior to standard microsystems, ms. king was chief executive officer of ami semiconductor, inc., a publicly traded company, from 2001 until it was acquired by on semiconductor corp. in 2008. other public company boards current none past 5 years allegro microsystems, inc. (until 2021) idacorp, inc. (until 2021) qualifications: we believe that ms. king s qualifications to serve as a director include her extensive management and operational experience in the high-tech and semiconductor industries as well as her significant strategic and financial expertise. alan s. batey , age 61, has been a director since 2019. mr. batey served as executive vice president and president of north america for general motors company (a publicly traded automotive manufacturer), as well as the global brand chief for chevrolet, a division of general motors company, from 2014 until 2019. his career spans more than 39 years with general motors where he held various senior management positions in operations, marketing, and sales around the world. other public company boards current none past 5 years none qualifications: we believe that mr. batey s qualifications to serve as a director include his extensive senior management experience at general motors, where he developed expertise on a broad set of complex strategic, operational, and technological matters involving the automotive industry, an industry that is expected to be a growth market for the company. kevin l. beebe , age 65, has been a director since 2004. he has been president and chief executive officer of 2bpartners, llc (a partnership that provides strategic, financial, and operational advice to private equity investors and management) since 2007. in 2014, mr. beebe became a founding partner of astra capital management (a private equity firm based in washington, d.c.). previously, beginning in 1998, he was group president of operations at alltel corporation (a telecommunications services company). other public company boards current sba communications corporation frontier communications parent, inc. (formerly frontier communications corporation), lead independent director past 5 years altimar acquisition corporation (until 2021) altimar acquisition corp. ii (until 2021) 4 qualifications: we believe that mr. beebe s qualifications to serve as a director include his two decades of experience as an operating executive in the wireless telecommunications industry as well as his experience and relationships gained from advising leading private equity firms that are transacting business in the global capital markets. eric j. guerin, age 53, has been a director since 2022. he currently serves as chief financial officer of rb global (a publicly traded provider of insights, services and transaction solutions for buyers and sellers of commercial assets and vehicles), a role he has held since january 2024. previously, mr. guerin served as senior vice president and chief financial officer of veritiv corporation (a formerly publicly traded provider of packaging and hygiene products), from march 2023 to december 2023 and its senior vice president-finance from january 2023 to march 2023. prior to that, he served as executive vice president and chief financial officer of cdk global inc. (a formerly publicly traded provider of integrated technology solutions to the automotive industry) from 2021 to 2022. from 2016 to 2021, he served as division vice president and sector chief financial officer at corning glass technologies, a division of corning, inc. previously, he served in financial leadership roles with flowserve corporation, novartis corporation, johnson johnson services inc., and astrazeneca plc. other public company boards current none past 5 years natus medical incorporated (until 2022) qualifications: we believe that mr. guerin s qualifications to serve as a director include his financial and operational expertise, together with his extensive engagements within asia-pacific markets. suzanne e. mcbride , age 56, has been a director since 2022. ms. mcbride serves as chief operations officer for iridium communications inc. ( iridium ) (a publicly traded operator of a global satellite communications network). prior to rejoining iridium in february 2019, where she had previously served from 2007 to 2016 in various leadership roles, ms. mcbride served from june 2016 to january 2019 as senior vice president and chief operations officer for oneweb (a privately held company building a space-based global communications network that filed a voluntary petition for chapter 11 bankruptcy protection on march 27, 2020). earlier in her career, she held a series of increasingly senior positions in technology and operations with motorola solutions, inc. (a publicly traded telecommunications company) and general dynamics corporation (a publicly traded aerospace and defense company). other public company boards current iridium communications inc. past 5 years none qualifications: we believe that ms. mcbride s qualifications to serve as a director include her extensive strategy and operations expertise developed through twenty-five years of experience within the wireless technology industry. 5 david p. mcglade , age 64, has been a director since 2005. he served as chairman of the board of intelsat s.a. ( intelsat ) (a formerly publicly traded worldwide provider of satellite communication services) from april 2013 to february 2022. mr. mcglade served as executive chairman of intelsat from april 2015 to march 2018, prior to which he served as chairman and chief executive officer. mr. mcglade joined intelsat in april 2005 and was the deputy chairman of intelsat from august 2008 until april 2013. previously, mr. mcglade served as an executive director of mmo2 plc and as the chief executive officer of o2 uk (a subsidiary of mmo2), a position he held from october 2000 until march 2005. other public company boards current none past 5 years intelsat s.a. (until 2022) qualifications: we believe that mr. mcglade s qualifications to serve as a director include his significant operational, strategic, and financial acumen, as well as his knowledge about global capital markets, developed over nearly four decades of experience in the telecommunications business. robert a. schriesheim , age 64, has been a director since 2006. he has been chairman of truax partners llc (a consulting firm) since 2018 and has served as adjunct associate professor of finance at the university of chicago booth school of business since september 2023. he served as executive vice president and chief financial officer of sears holdings corporation (a publicly traded nationwide retailer) from august 2011 to october 2016. from january 2010 to october 2010, mr. schriesheim was chief financial officer of hewitt associates, inc. (a global human resources consulting and outsourcing company that was acquired by aon corporation). from october 2006 until december 2009, he was the executive vice president and chief financial officer of lawson software, inc. (a publicly traded erp software provider). other public company boards current houlihan lokey, inc., lead independent director indivior plc past 5 years frontier communications corporation (until 2021) qualifications: we believe that mr. schriesheim s qualifications to serve as a director include his extensive knowledge of the capital markets and corporate financial capital structures, his expertise evaluating and structuring merger and acquisition transactions within the technology sector, and his experience gained through leading companies through major strategic and financial corporate transformations. maryann turcke , age 59, has been a director since 2023. most recently, she served as a senior advisor at brookfield asset management from september 2020 to september 2022. previously, ms. turcke served as chief operating officer of the national football league ( nfl ) from january 2018 to september 2020 and as a senior advisor for the nfl from september 2020 to may 2021. she joined the league as president of nfl network, digital media, nfl films and it in april 2017. prior to the nfl, ms. turcke served for more than a decade in various leadership roles within bce inc. (a publicly traded communications company formerly known as bell canada enterprises), including serving from april 2015 to february 2017 as president of bell media, a division of bce. other public company boards current frontier communications parent, inc. royal bank of canada past 5 years northern star investment corp. ii (until 2023) 6 qualifications: we believe that ms. turcke s qualifications to serve as a director include her significant operational, management and financial experience, including in the telecommunications industry. in addition to the information presented above regarding each director s specific experience, qualifications, attributes, and skills that led our board of directors to conclude that he or she should serve as a director, we also believe that each of our directors has a reputation for integrity, honesty, and adherence to high ethical standards. they have each demonstrated business acumen, an ability to exercise sound judgment, and a commitment of service to skyworks. each of our directors will serve until the 2025 annual meeting of stockholders and until their successors are elected and qualified or until their earlier resignation or removal. executive officers (other than the chief executive officer) carlos s. bori , age 54, joined the company in july 2013 and has served as senior vice president, sales and marketing, since november 2017. he previously served as vice president, sales and marketing, from may 2016 to november 2017 and as vice president, marketing, from july 2013 to may 2016. previously, he spent more than 18 years with beacon electronic associates (a north american independent representative of semiconductor manufacturers), serving as its president from 2004 to 2013. karilee a. durham , age 56, joined the company in april 2018 and is senior vice president, human resources. previously, ms. durham served as senior vice president, human resources and general affairs for goodman global group, inc. (an hvac manufacturing and distribution company) from september 2010 to april 2018. earlier, she held multiple senior human resources positions with dell inc. (a computer retailer) from october 2007 to september 2010, prior to which she held human resources positions at flextronics international ltd., solectron corporation, and ut-battelle llc . reza kasnavi , age 51, joined the company in 2010 and has served as senior vice president, technology and manufacturing, since november 2019. he previously served as vice president and general manager, open market platforms, from november 2012 to september 2018 and as vice president, central engineering and quality, from september 2018 to november 2019. prior to joining skyworks, dr. kasnavi spent 10 years as an investor and executive with tallwood venture capital (an investment firm focused on semiconductor-related technologies and markets), holding various leadership positions at several tallwood portfolio companies including sequoia communications. kris sennesael , age 56, joined the company in august 2016 and is senior vice president and chief financial officer. previously, mr. sennesael served as chief financial officer for enphase energy, inc. (a semiconductor-based renewable energy solutions provider), from september 2012 to august 2016. earlier, he served as chief financial officer for standard microsystems corporation (a global fabless semiconductor company) from january 2009 to august 2012, prior to which he held financial positions at on semiconductor corp., ami semiconductor, inc., and alcatel microelectronics. mr. sennesael currently serves on the board of directors of maxeon solar technologies, ltd. (a publicly traded manufacturer and provider of solar energy products). robert j. terry , age 58, joined the company in 2003 and has served as senior vice president, general counsel and secretary since november 2017. he previously served as vice president, general counsel and secretary from november 2016 to november 2017 and as vice president, associate general counsel and assistant secretary from june 2011 to november 2016. before joining skyworks, he served as general counsel and secretary for day software, inc. ( day software ) (an enterprise content management software company), from july 2001 to february 2003. prior to joining day software, mr. terry was in private practice, focusing on corporate and securities matters, mergers and acquisitions, and general business litigation. 7 audit committee we have established an audit committee consisting of the following individuals, each of whom qualifies as independent within the meaning of the applicable listing rules of the nasdaq stock market llc (the nasdaq rules ) and meets the criteria for independence set forth in rule 10a-3(b)(1) under the securities exchange act of 1934 ( exchange act ): david p. mcglade (chairman), eric guerin, christine king, and robert a. schriesheim. the board of directors has determined that each of mr. mcglade (chairman), mr. guerin, ms. king, and mr. schriesheim meets the qualifications of an audit committee financial expert under sec rules and the qualifications of financial sophistication under the applicable nasdaq rules. code of ethics we have adopted a written code of business conduct and ethics that applies to our directors, officers, and employees, including our principal executive officer, principal financial officer, principal accounting officer or controller, or persons performing similar functions. we make available our code of business conduct and ethics free of charge through our website at www.skyworksinc.com . we intend to disclose any amendments to, or waivers from, our code of business conduct and ethics that are required to be publicly disclosed by posting any such amendment or waivers on our website pursuant to sec requirements and nasdaq rules. insider trading policy we have adopted the skyworks solutions, inc. company policy regarding insider trading and disclosure of material non-public information governing the purchase, sale, and/or other dispositions of the company s securities by directors, officers and employees, which the company believes is reasonably designed to promote compliance with insider trading laws, rules and regulations, and any listing standards applicable to the company. a copy of the skyworks solutions, inc. company policy regarding insider trading and disclosure of material non-public information is filed as exhibit 19 to this form 10-k/a. 8 item 11. executive compensation. compensation discussion and analysis named executive officers this compensation discussion and analysis section discusses the compensation policies and programs for our chief executive officer, our chief financial officer, and our three next most highly paid executive officers during our fiscal year ended september 27, 2024 ( fiscal year 2024 ), as determined under the rules of the sec. we refer to this group of executive officers as our named executive officers. for fiscal year 2024, our named executive officers were: liam k. griffin, chairman, chief executive officer and president; kris sennesael, senior vice president and chief financial officer; reza kasnavi, senior vice president, technology and manufacturing; carlos s. bori, senior vice president, sales and marketing; and robert j. terry, senior vice president, general counsel and secretary. engagement with stockholders regarding executive compensation in evaluating and establishing our executive compensation policies and programs, our compensation committee values and actively considers the opinions expressed by our stockholders through the say-on-pay advisory vote at each annual stockholder meeting, as well as through our ongoing stockholder engagement efforts. at our 2024 annual meeting of stockholders (the 2024 annual meeting ), approximately 88% of the votes cast approved our say-on-pay proposal, reflecting continued support for our compensation policies and determinations for our fiscal year ended september 29, 2023 ( fiscal year 2023 ). following the 2024 annual meeting, we engaged in formal stockholder outreach with 20 institutional stockholders representing approximately 54% of the company s shares outstanding. stockholders representing approximately 44% of the company s shares outstanding responded to the outreach, either with written feedback, a request to speak, or by declining the invitation. generally, investors who declined a meeting noted that they did so because they did not have any concerns to discuss. we held engagement meetings with each of those stockholders who requested to meet, representing approximately 36% of the company s shares outstanding. the lead independent director and chairman of our compensation committee, ms. king, was actively involved in stockholder engagement. during these conversations, institutional stockholders were interested in discussing a range of topics beyond executive compensation, including corporate governance, business strategy, our efforts to eliminate the supermajority vote provisions from our restated certificate of incorporation, and our sustainability program. in addition, these stockholders generally did not express concerns with the overall structure of our compensation program, with many expressing support for our program and some expressing a preference for longer performance periods in our long-term incentive program. many of our stockholders also communicated their appreciation for the company s track record of disclosure and stockholder responsiveness over the past several years. input and feedback from our stockholders during the most recent outreach, as well as the ongoing dialogue we have shared with stockholders for many years, continues to directly inform the evolution of compensation practices, which are detailed in the section below. 9 evolution of compensation program in response to stockholder input over the past several years, the compensation committee has made several changes to our executive compensation program to further align it with stockholder interests and the evolution of our business. for fiscal year 2024, the compensation committee made two changes. first, it modified our peer group, adding two technology companies whose revenues and market capitalizations were below the median for the peer group. second, the compensation committee returned the short-term incentive program for fiscal year 2024 from two semi-annual performance periods to one annual performance period because the compensation committee believed that it could set appropriately rigorous performance goals for a one-year period. many of our stockholders indicated they were pleased with the change we made to the short-term incentive program. for our fiscal year ending october 3, 2025 ( fiscal year 2025 ), the compensation committee made additional changes to our long-term stock-based incentives for executives that were directly responsive to stockholder feedback. effective with the fiscal year 2025 performance share awards to named executive officers, both the performance period and vesting period for the ebitda margin percentile ranking metric were increased from two years to three years. these most recent changes follow several changes to our executive compensation program in fiscal years 2022 and 2023, further demonstrating the compensation committee s commitment to responding to stockholder feedback and evolving our programs to align with our business and strategic goals. for the company s fiscal year 2022 executive compensation program, the compensation committee implemented several changes to the performance share award design, including extending vesting for two key metrics to two years (from one year), incorporating a relative ebitda margin metric (from an absolute metric), and setting target performance of relative metrics at the 55 th percentile. in both the company s fiscal year ended september 30, 2022 ( fiscal year 2022 ) and fiscal year 2023, the compensation committee modified our peer group to improve comparability, replacing larger market cap companies with companies that were more comparable in size with the company. approach for determining form and amounts of compensation the compensation committee, which is composed solely of independent directors within the meaning of applicable nasdaq rules and non-employee directors within the meaning of rule 16b-3 under the exchange act, is responsible for determining all components and amounts of compensation to be paid to our named executive officers, as well as any other executive officers or employees who report directly to the chief executive officer. the compensation committee sets compensation for the named executive officers, including base salary, short-term incentives, and long-term stock-based incentives, at levels generally intended to be competitive with the compensation of comparable executives in semiconductor companies with which we compete for executive talent and to link the compensation of our named executive officers to improvements in the company s financial performance and increases in stockholder value. compensation program objectives the objectives of our executive compensation program are to attract, retain, and motivate highly qualified executives to operate our business, and to link the compensation of those executives to improvements in the company s financial performance and increases in stockholder value. accordingly, the compensation committee s goals in establishing our executive compensation program include: ensuring that our executive compensation program is competitive with a group of companies in the semiconductor industry with which we compete for executive talent; providing a base salary that serves as the foundation of a compensation package that attracts and retains the executive talent needed to achieve our business objectives; 10 providing short-term variable compensation that motivates executives and rewards them for achieving company financial performance targets; providing long-term stock-based compensation that aligns the interest of our executives with stockholders by rewarding them for long-term increases in stockholder value; and ensuring that our executive compensation program is perceived as fundamentally fair to our employees. retention of compensation consultant the compensation committee has engaged aon consulting ( aon ) to assist in determining the components and amount of executive compensation. aon reports directly to the compensation committee, through its chairman, and the compensation committee retains the right to terminate or replace the consultant at any time. the compensation committee has considered the relationships that aon has with the company, the members of the compensation committee and our executive officers, as well as the policies that aon has in place to maintain its independence and objectivity, and has determined that aon s work for the compensation committee has not raised any conflicts of interest. company management also purchases published compensation and benefits surveys from aon, and on occasion engages certain affiliates of aon in various jurisdictions for services unrelated to executive compensation and benefits, engagements for which the company s management has not sought the compensation committee s approval. the fees paid to aon and its affiliates in fiscal year 2024 for these surveys and additional services did not exceed $120,000. use of comparator group data the compensation committee annually compares the components and amounts of compensation that we provide to our chief executive officer and each of the other named executive officers with comparator group data for each position and uses this comparison data to help inform its review and determination of base salaries, short-term incentives, and long-term stock-based compensation awards, as discussed in further detail below under components of compensation . for fiscal year 2024, the compensation committee approved comparator group data consisting of a 50/50 blend of (i) aon survey data of semiconductor companies (where sufficient data was not available in the aon semiconductor survey data for a given executive position, the comparator group data also included survey data regarding high-technology companies), and (ii) data from the group of 17 publicly traded semiconductor companies listed below. each year the compensation committee engages aon to assess the peer group. using this information, the compensation committee seeks to create a peer group comprised of semiconductor companies. consolidation within the semiconductor industry over time has resulted in fewer semiconductor companies that are of similar market capitalization and revenue as skyworks. as a result, when considering companies to potentially include in the peer group, the compensation committee also considers companies in adjacent industries, such as the semiconductor manufacturing equipment industry, as well as companies with smaller or greater revenue or market capitalization than the company, many of which are business competitors and companies with which we compete for executive talent. for the company s fiscal year 2024 compensation program, we made adjustments to our peer group from the prior fiscal year based on several factors to improve comparability, in part in response to stockholder feedback. specifically, we added seagate technology and teradyne. at the time that changes to the peer group were 11 considered, both new additions had lower market capitalizations measured on a 30-day average as of march 17, 2023, as compared to the company. peer group for fiscal year 2024 compensation ( fy24 peer group ) advanced micro devices marvell technology on semiconductor texas instruments analog devices microchip technology qorvo western digital entegris micron technology qualcomm kla corporation monolithic power systems seagate technology lam research nxp semiconductors teradyne the compensation committee generally seeks to make decisions regarding each named executive officer s compensation that are competitive within the comparator group, with consideration given to the executive s role, responsibility, performance, and length of service. after reviewing the comparator group data and considering the input of aon, the compensation committee established (and the full board was advised of) the base salary, short-term incentive target, and stock-based compensation for each named executive officer for fiscal year 2024. aon advised the compensation committee that such components of executive compensation for fiscal year 2024 were competitive for chief executive officers and other executive officers at companies of similar size and complexity in the semiconductor industry. in determining the compensation of our chief executive officer for fiscal year 2024, the compensation committee focused on (i) competitive levels of compensation for chief executive officers who are leading a company of similar size and complexity, (ii) the importance of retaining and incentivizing a chief executive officer with the strategic, financial, and leadership skills necessary to ensure our continued growth and success, (iii) our chief executive officer s role relative to the other named executive officers, (iv) input from the full board on our chief executive officer s performance, and (v) the length of our chief executive officer s service to the company. our chief executive officer was not present during the voting or deliberations of the compensation committee concerning his compensation. the compensation committee considered the recommendations of the chief executive officer regarding the compensation of the other named executive officers and each of his other direct reports. these recommendations were based on an assessment of each individual s responsibilities, experience, performance, and contribution to the company s performance, and also took into account internal factors such as scope of role and level in the organization, in addition to external factors such as the current environment for attracting and retaining executives. components of compensation the key elements of compensation for our named executive officers are base salary, short-term incentives, long-term stock-based incentives, and health and welfare benefits. for fiscal year 2024, the compensation committee sought to make decisions that would result in each named executive officer s target total direct compensation being competitive within the comparator group, with consideration given to the executive s role, responsibility, performance, and length of service. base salary the compensation committee annually determines a competitive base salary for each executive officer using the comparator group data and input provided by aon. base salaries are intended to attract and retain talented executives, recognize individual roles and responsibilities and provide stable income to executives . in order to provide flexibility in consideration of differences in an individual executive s scope of responsibilities, length of service, and performance, the compensation committee did not target a specific percentile of the comparator group for executive officer salaries; however, the salaries of the executive officers were generally near the median of the comparator group. 12 the base salary for the chief executive officer for fiscal year 2024 was unchanged from fiscal year 2023. the base salary increase for fiscal year 2024 for each other named executive officer, as reflected in the table below, was based on the market-based salary adjustments recommended by aon, as well as recommendations by the chief executive officer and consideration of the scope of duties for such named executive officer. fy2024 base salary ($) fy2023 base salary ($) liam k. griffin 1,175,000 1,175,000 kris sennesael 630,000 606,000 reza kasnavi 600,000 576,000 carlos s. bori 600,000 541,000 robert j. terry 562,000 540,000 short-term incentives overview our short-term incentive compensation plan for executive officers is established annually by the compensation committee and is intended to motivate and reward executives by tying a significant portion of their total cash compensation to the company s achievement of pre-established performance goals that are generally one year or less in duration. the compensation committee believes that pre-established performance goals under the company s short-term incentive compensation plan for executive officers should generally be measured over a one-year performance period. beginning with the company s fiscal year ended october 2, 2020 ( fiscal year 2020 ) and continuing through fiscal year 2023, the compensation committee established annual short-term compensation incentive plans with two six-month performance periods as a result of significant market uncertainties resulting from geopolitical concerns and global supply chain challenges affecting the company and its customers, which made forecasting difficult. with respect to the fiscal year 2024 executive incentive plan (the incentive plan ) adopted by the compensation committee on december 14, 2023, in large part due to feedback from the company s stockholders, the compensation committee returned to an annual performance period for the short-term compensation incentive plan despite some continuing uncertain market conditions. although significant macroeconomic challenges persisted, the compensation committee believed that it could set appropriately rigorous performance goals for a one-year period for fiscal year 2024. incentive opportunities for each executive officer, short-term incentive compensation at the target level is designed to be near the median short-term incentive compensation of the comparator group. after reviewing comparator group data, the compensation committee determined that the target incentive under the incentive plan, as a percentage of base salary, for each of the named executive officers should not be changed, as compared to the target incentives under the prior year s short-term incentive plan. 13 the following table shows the range of short-term incentive compensation that each named executive officer could earn in fiscal year 2024 as a percentage of such executive officer s annual base salary. threshold target maximum chief executive officer 80% 160% 320% chief financial officer 50% 100% 200% other named executive officers 40% 80% 160% performance goals in december 2023, the compensation committee established performance goals for the incentive plan that were based on achieving revenue and non-gaap operating income performance goals, each of which was weighted at 50%. the non-gaap operating income performance goal is measured based on the company s publicly disclosed non-gaap operating income 1 after accounting for any incentive award payments, including those to be made under the incentive plan. the target level performance goals were established by the compensation committee under the incentive plan after reviewing the company s historical operating results, as well as the company s business outlook and expected future results relative to peers and were designed to require significant effort and operational success on the part of our executives and the company. the maximum level performance goals established by the compensation committee have historically been difficult to achieve and are designed to represent outstanding performance that the compensation committee believes should be rewarded. the performance goals established under the incentive plan for fiscal year 2024 were as follows: (in millions) revenue non-gaap operating income threshold $4,000 $1,000 target $4,375 $1,311 maximum $4,775 $1,605 the compensation committee seeks to set challenging yet attainable performance goals for incentive compensation to motivate our executives. for fiscal year 2024, the compensation committee, after substantial evaluation and discussion, set target performance goals that were below fiscal year 2023 performance. nonetheless, the compensation committee believed that these goals reflected an appropriate level of rigor given several factors. the goals were established in alignment with the company s annual operating plan for fiscal year 2024, which took into account the broader macroeconomic environment, elevated levels of semiconductor inventory globally, and the performance expectations of our stockholders. the rigor of these target goals is underscored by the below-target achievement amounts as described in the section below. the incentive plan also stipulated that payouts to executives following the end of the fiscal year, under either of the revenue and non-gaap operating income metrics, were conditioned upon the company achieving full-year non-gaap operating income of at least $1.0 billion. calculation of incentive plan payments under the incentive plan, upon completion of the fiscal year, the compensation committee determined the extent to which the company s performance goals were attained, reviewed the chief executive officer s recommended payouts under the incentive plan, and approved the awards to be made under the incentive plan. 1 non-gaap operating income typically excludes from gaap operating income the following: share-based compensation expense, acquisition-related expenses, amortization of acquisition-related intangibles, settlements, gains, losses, and impairments and restructuring-related charges. 14 achievement under the performance goals at the threshold, target, or maximum level corresponds to payment under the incentive plan at the threshold, target, or maximum percentage, as applicable, with such percentage multiplied by the executive s base salary for fiscal year 2024 and then multiplied by the weighting assigned to that performance goal. the payout for achievement under the performance goals between either the threshold and target levels or the target and maximum levels would be based on linear interpolation between the two relevant amounts. each executive s payment under the incentive plan is calculated by evaluating achievement of each performance goal individually, determining the portion of the total eligible incentive payment earned with respect to each such performance goal, and totaling the resulting amounts. the compensation committee retained the discretion to make payments, upon consideration of recommendations by the chief executive officer, even if the threshold performance goals were not met or if the nominal level of non-gaap operating income was not met, or to make payments in excess of the maximum level if the company s performance exceeded the maximum performance goals. while the compensation committee believed it was appropriate to retain this discretion in order to make short-term incentive compensation awards in appropriate extraordinary circumstances, no such adjustments were actually made. fiscal year results for fiscal year 2024, the company s revenue and non-gaap operating income achieved were $4,178 million and $1,137 million, respectively, resulting in a short-term compensation award for each named executive officer equal to 73% of his or her target payment level. in november 2024, upon certifying that the nominal level of non-gaap operating income had been achieved for the fiscal year, the compensation committee approved payment of the short-term incentive to the company s executives for fiscal year 2024. the compensation committee did not exercise discretion, either upward or downward, to executives payments under the incentive plan. the following table shows the company s achievement under the incentive plan: (in millions) revenue non-gaap operating income threshold $4,000 $1,000 target $4,375 $1,311 maximum $4,775 $1,605 achieved $4,178 $1,137 long-term stock-based compensation overview the compensation committee generally makes long-term stock-based compensation awards to executive officers on an annual basis. long-term stock-based compensation awards are intended to align the interests of our executive officers with those of our stockholders and to reward our executive officers for increases in stockholder value over periods of time greater than one year. for fiscal year 2024, the compensation committee made an annual stock-based compensation award to each of the named executive officers on november 7, 2023, at a regularly scheduled compensation committee meeting. 15 fiscal year 2024 stock-based compensation awards in making annual stock-based compensation awards to executive officers for fiscal year 2024, the compensation committee first reviewed the comparator group grant data by executive position. the compensation committee used that data to inform its determination of a target dollar value for the long-term stock-based award for each executive officer, as set forth in the table below, targeting awards for fiscal year 2024 that were competitive within the comparator group. each executive officer was granted a performance share award ( psa ) and a restricted stock unit ( rsu ) award equivalent to 60% and 40%, respectively, of the dollar value of the executive s fiscal year 2024 stock-based award, calculating the number of shares subject to each award using the fair market value of the company s common stock on the date of such award and an assumption that the company would achieve the target level of performance required to earn the psa. the compensation committee s rationale for awarding psas is to further align the executive s interests with those of our stockholders by using equity awards that will vest only if the company achieves pre-established performance goals, and we believe the compensation committee s decision to award a portion of the psas subject to metrics measured over a multi-year performance period more closely aligns the executive s interests with those of our stockholders. each rsu award granted to executive officers in fiscal year 2024 vests over four years at a rate of twenty-five percent (25%) per year commencing one year from the grant date and thereafter on each subsequent anniversary of the grant date for the following three years, provided the executive officer remains employed by the company through each such vesting date. name value of fy24 stock-based award (1) number of shares subject to psas, at target (2) number of shares subject to rsus (2) liam k. griffin $14,000,000 94,002 62,667 kris sennesael $3,800,000 25,515 17,009 reza kasnavi $4,000,000 26,857 17,905 carlos s. bori $4,000,000 26,857 17,905 robert j. terry $3,300,000 22,158 14,771 ________________________ (1) the grant date fair values of these stock-based awards as disclosed further below in the summary compensation table and the grants of plan-based awards table differ from the values stated above due to the grant date fair value of the psas being computed using a monte carlo simulation to value the portion of the award related to total shareholder return ( tsr ) percentile ranking, in accordance with the provisions of fasb asc topic 718 compensation stock compensation ( asc 718 ). (2) reflects the dollar value of the award, divided by $89.36 per share, which was the closing price of the company s common stock on the nasdaq global select market on november 7, 2023. after setting award levels by position and evaluating our business needs for the attraction and retention of executives and employees as well as internal and external circumstances impacting the company and its employees, the compensation committee also reviewed the comparator group data to set the aggregate number of shares of the company s common stock that would be made available for annual equity awards to eligible non-executive employees of the company, as a percentage of the total number of the outstanding shares of the company s common stock. fy24 psas the psas granted on november 7, 2023 (the fy24 psas ), have both performance and continued employment conditions that must be met in order for the executive to receive shares underlying the award. 16 the performance condition of the fy24 psas compares the company s performance under three distinct metrics during the applicable performance period against a range of pre-established targets, as follows: percentage of aggregate target level shares performance period vesting target level shares with respect to emerging revenue growth metric (1) 25% fiscal year 2024 100% at the end of year two target level shares with respect to ebitda margin percentile ranking metric (2) 25% fiscal years 2024 2025 100% at the end of year two target level shares with respect to tsr percentile ranking metric (3) 50% fiscal years 2024 2026 100% at the end of year three ________________________ (1) the emerging revenue growth metric measures the company s year-over-year revenue growth in certain key product categories, each of which represents an identified longer-term growth market for the company. (2) the ebitda margin percentile ranking metric measures the company s ebitda margin achieved relative to the companies in our fy24 peer group during a two-year performance period comprising the company s fiscal years 2024 and 2025. for purposes of the ebitda margin percentile ranking metric, ebitda margin is calculated by dividing ebitda by revenue for the applicable period, where ebitda is defined as non-gaap operating income, plus depreciation and amortization, for the applicable period. with respect to the company and each fy24 peer group company, ebitda and revenue are calculated based on publicly reported financial information for the applicable period (which for the fy24 peer group companies consists of the eight-quarter period that ends closest to, but not later than, october 3, 2025). 2 when calculating the company s ebitda margin, the impact of any acquisition or disposition occurring within the performance period is excluded if the revenue attributable to such acquisition or disposition exceeds $50 million during such period. (3) the tsr percentile ranking metric measures the company s percentile ranking achieved with respect to its peer group. the peer group for purposes of the tsr percentile ranking metric includes each of the companies in the s p 500 index during the performance period but excludes any such company that during the three-year performance period is acquired by or merged with (or enters into an agreement to be acquired by or merged with) another entity. for purposes of the psa award, tsr for the company and for each company in the peer group is calculated using a starting price and ending price, which consist of the average of the closing prices for each trading day during the sixty (60) consecutive calendar days ending on, and including, the last trading day before the measurement period begins and the last trading day of the measurement period, respectively, assuming dividend reinvestment and adjusting for stock splits, as applicable. the semiconductor industry generally and, in particular, many of the markets into which the company sells its connectivity products, are characterized by constant and rapid technological change, continuous product evolution, and short product life cycles, including annual product refreshes in some cases. recognizing that a significant driver of long-term growth is our ability to identify and execute on emerging revenue growth opportunities, the compensation committee believes that retaining emerging revenue growth as a key metric with a one-year performance period is appropriate. moreover, utilizing only performance periods longer than one year (e.g. multi-year periods) could limit the committee s ability to focus management on the most compelling growth opportunities each year. accordingly, for the fy24 psas, the compensation committee retained emerging revenue growth as a one-year metric (representing 25% of the target value of the psas) to incentivize our management team on specific emerging product lines that have higher growth potential and are intended to drive long-term value creation. in light of stockholder feedback following the 2021 annual meeting of stockholders, the compensation committee determined that shares earned pursuant to the emerging revenue growth metric would not vest until the two-year anniversary of the grant date. 2 when calculating the ebitda margin percentile ranking, the performance of a company in the fy24 peer group will be included if during the performance period such company in the fy24 peer group publicly reports quarterly financial results for at least six consecutive quarters out of the eight applicable quarters. 17 for 25% of the target value under the fy24 psas, the compensation committee retained a two-year ebitda margin percentile ranking metric that measures performance relative to the fy24 peer group. to incentivize above-median performance, the compensation committee set the target percentile for the ebitda margin percentile ranking metric at the 55 th percentile of our fy24 peer group. following stockholder feedback received after the 2024 annual meeting of stockholders, the compensation committee determined that shares earned pursuant to the ebitda margin percentile ranking metric for awards granted to named executive officers for fiscal year 2025 would be subject to a three-year performance period and would not vest until the three-year anniversary of the grant date. as in prior years, the remaining half of the target value under the fy24 psas was based on a three-year tsr percentile ranking. the specific pre-established performance goals for the fy24 psas under the emerging revenue growth, ebitda margin percentile ranking and tsr percentile ranking metrics are as follows: company metric threshold target maximum 1-year emerging revenue growth (%) 5.0% 10.0% 15.0% 2-year ebitda margin percentile ranking 25th 55th 75th 3-year tsr percentile ranking 25th 55th 90th as with the incentive plan, the pre-established targets under the fy24 psas were established by the compensation committee after reviewing the company s historical operating results and growth rates as well as the company s expected future results relative to peers and were designed to require significant effort and operational success on the part of our executives and the company: emerging revenue growth metric: the target level was set at 10%, representing above-market annual growth, the maximum level was set at 15%, which the compensation committee believed represented outstanding performance that would be difficult to achieve, and the threshold level was set at 5% as a result of continued market uncertainties. the threshold, target and maximum levels vary year to year as a result of the composition of what, as part of the company s product portfolio, comprises emerging revenue. for fiscal year 2024, emerging revenue growth was based on driving growth in the following key product categories: next-generation connectivity products (i.e., wifi 6/6e/7), strategic bulk acoustic wave ( baw ) expansion (i.e., baw-enabled products excluding products sold to our largest customer), internet of things ( iot ) cellular engines (excluding products sold to our largest customer), and audio products, with baw-enabled product revenue limited to the strategic baw category. ebitda margin percentile ranking metric: the compensation committee set the target percentile at the 55 th percentile of the fy24 peer group in order to further incentivize above-median performance. tsr percentile ranking metric: consistent with the prior year s award, the compensation committee set the target percentile at the 55 th percentile of the applicable peer group in order to further incentivize above-median performance. 18 the number of shares issuable under the fy24 psas corresponds to the level of achievement of the performance goals, as follows (subject to linear interpolation for amounts between threshold and target or target and maximum ): performance achieved threshold target maximum % of target level shares earned with respect to emerging revenue growth metric 50% 100% 200% % of target level shares earned with respect to ebitda margin percentile ranking metric 50% 100% 200% % of target level shares earned with respect to tsr percentile ranking metric 50% 100% 300% the continued employment condition of the fy24 psas provides that, to the extent that the performance goals are met, the shares earned under such metrics would vest as follows (provided, in each case, that the executive remains employed by the company through each such vesting date): anniversary of grant date (1) two year three year % of shares earned with respect to emerging revenue growth metric 100% % of shares earned with respect to ebitda margin percentile ranking metric 100% % of shares earned with respect to tsr percentile ranking metric 100% ________________________ (1) in the event of termination by reason of death or permanent disability, the holder of an fy24 psa (or the holder s estate) would receive any earned but unissued shares that would have been issuable thereunder during the remaining term of the award. during fiscal year 2023, the base period against which fiscal year 2024 emerging revenue performance was measured, the company achieved revenue in the specified key product categories of $728 million. during fiscal year 2024, the company achieved revenue in the specified key product categories of $772 million, representing emerging revenue growth of 6%, which was between the minimum and target level of performance. this level of achievement reflected the rigorous target that had been set by the compensation committee. this resulted in the company achieving approximately 61% of the target level of shares for such metric. the shares earned under this metric will be issued in november 2025, provided that the named executive officer meets the continued employment condition. in the period comprising fiscal year 2023 and fiscal year 2024, the period over which the ebitda margin percentile ranking metric was measured, the company achieved a margin of 38%, resulting in its ranking in the 60th percentile against the applicable peer group. this resulted in the company achieving 125% of the target level of shares for such metric. the shares earned under this metric were issued in november 2024. outstanding psas at the end of fiscal year 2024 as summarized in the table below of the annual psa grants made to named executive officers since our fiscal year ended september 28, 2018 ( fiscal year 2018 ) (the first year in which the compensation committee awarded psas subject to a metric measured over a three-year performance period), achievement of the tsr percentile ranking metric under the fy24 psas, which is subject to a three-year performance period, will be determined following the conclusion of the company s fiscal year ending october 2, 2026 ( fiscal year 2026 ). during the 19 three-year performance period under the fiscal year 2022 psas comprising the company s fiscal years 2022, 2023, and 2024, the company realized a tsr of -38% resulting in its ranking in the 17th percentile against the applicable peer group. as a result of failing to achieve the threshold tsr percentile ranking metric, no shares were earned by the named executive officers with respect to such metric, and all psas with respect to such metric were cancelled. psa fiscal year grant date metric performance period achieved (% of target) fy18 11/7/2017 non-gaap ebitda growth fy18 99.8% 3-year tsr percentile ranking fy18 fy20 0% fy19 11/6/2018 non-gaap ebitda growth fy19 0% 3-year tsr percentile ranking fy19 fy21 74.1% fy20 11/5/2019 emerging revenue growth fy20 200% design wins fy20 200% 3-year tsr percentile ranking fy20 fy22 0% fy21 11/11/2020 emerging revenue growth fy21 200% design wins fy21 200% 3-year tsr percentile ranking fy21 fy23 0% fy22 11/10/2021 emerging revenue growth fy22 200% ebitda margin percentile ranking fy22 fy23 133% 3-year tsr percentile ranking fy22 fy24 0% fy23 11/8/2022 emerging revenue growth fy23 200% ebitda margin percentile ranking fy23 fy24 125% 3-year tsr percentile ranking fy23 fy25 perf. period in progress (1) fy24 11/7/2023 emerging revenue growth fy24 61% ebitda margin percentile ranking fy24 fy25 perf. period in progress (2) 3-year tsr percentile ranking fy24 fy26 perf. period in progress (3) ________________________ (1) as of january 19, 2025, performance under this metric during the applicable performance period was below the threshold level of performance. (2) as of january 19, 2025, performance under this metric during the applicable performance period was between the threshold and target levels of performance. (3) as of january 19, 2025, performance under this metric during the applicable performance period was below the threshold level of performance. other compensation and benefits we provide other benefits to our executive officers that are intended to be part of a competitive overall compensation program and are not tied to any company performance criteria. consistent with our objective of having compensation programs that are considered fair to our employees, executive officers are eligible to participate in the company s medical, dental, vision, life, and disability insurance plans, as well as the company s 401(k) savings and retirement plan and employee stock purchase plan, under the same terms as such benefits are offered to other benefits-eligible employees. we do not provide executive officers with any enhanced retirement benefits (i.e., executive officers are subject to the same limits on contributions as other employees, as we do not offer any supplemental executive retirement plan or other similar non-qualified deferred compensation plan), and they are eligible for 401(k) company-match contributions under the same terms as other employees. we offered executives the opportunity to participate in a reimbursement program for fiscal year 2024 providing up to an aggregate of $20,000 to each executive for the purchase of personal financial planning services, estate planning services, personal tax planning and preparation services, and/or an executive physical. no tax gross- 20 up was provided for such reimbursements. in fiscal year 2024, each of the named executive officers, other than mr. kasnavi, received reimbursement in connection with such services. severance and change-in-control benefits none of our executive officers, including the named executive officers, has an employment agreement that provides a specific term of employment with the company. accordingly, the employment of any such employee may be terminated at any time. we do provide certain benefits to our named executive officers upon certain qualifying terminations of employment and in connection with terminations of employment under certain circumstances following a change in control. a description of the material terms of our severance and change-in-control arrangements with the named executive officers can be found immediately below and further below under potential payments upon termination or change in control. the compensation committee believes that severance protections can play a valuable role in recruiting and retaining superior talent. severance and other termination benefits are an effective way to offer executives financial security to incent them to forego an opportunity with another company. these agreements also protect the company as the named executive officers are bound by non-solicit covenants for a period of twelve (12) months after termination of employment. outside of the change-in-control context, each named executive officer is entitled to severance benefits if his or her employment is involuntarily terminated by the company without cause and, in the case of the chief executive officer, if he terminates his own employment for good reason (as defined in the chief executive officer s change-in-control agreement). the level of each named executive officer s cash severance or other termination benefit is generally tied to his or her annual base salary and short-term incentive amounts. additionally, each named executive officer would receive enhanced severance benefits and accelerated vesting of equity awards if his or her employment were terminated under certain circumstances in connection with a change in control of the company. these benefits are described in detail further below under potential payments upon termination or change in control. the compensation committee believes these enhanced severance benefits and accelerated vesting are appropriate because the occurrence, or potential occurrence, of a change-in-control transaction would likely create uncertainty regarding the continued employment of executive officers that typically occurs in a change-in-control context, and such severance benefits and accelerated vesting encourage the named executive officers to remain employed with the company through the change-in-control process and to focus on enhancing stockholder value both before and during the process. the vesting protection helps assure the named executive officers that they will not lose the expected value of their equity awards because of a change in control of the company. in fiscal year 2024, the company adopted a policy providing for stockholder ratification of any new agreements or arrangements that provide for cash severance benefits payable to named executive officers that exceed 2.99 times the sum of the named executive officer s base salary and target bonus (as each such term is defined in the policy). executive officer stock ownership requirements we have adopted executive officer stock ownership guidelines with the objective of more closely aligning the interests of our executive officers with those of our stockholders. under the executive officer stock ownership guidelines, our named executive officers are each required to hold the lower of (a) the number of shares with a fair market value equal to the applicable multiple of such executive s current base salary, or (b) the applicable number of shares, each as set forth in the table below. common stock owned outright by the named executive officer (or by his or her spouse or minor children), common stock held in trust for the benefit of the named executive officer (or his or her spouse or minor children), or restricted stock or restricted stock units granted pursuant to the equity compensation plans of the company for which restrictions have lapsed, count towards the requirement. unexercised options, whether or not vested, and restricted stock and restricted stock units still subject to risk of forfeiture, as well 21 as any unissued performance shares, do not count towards the requirement. all of our named executive officers are in compliance with the executive officer stock ownership guidelines as of the date hereof. multiple of annual base salary (1) shares chief executive officer 6 96,900 chief financial officer 2.5 21,000 senior vice president, technology and manufacturing 2.5 19,900 senior vice president, sales and marketing 2.5 18,600 senior vice president and general counsel 2.5 18,600 ________________________ (1) for purposes of the executive officer stock ownership guidelines, the fair market value of the company s common stock is the average closing price per share of the company s common stock as reported on the nasdaq global select market (or if the common stock is not then traded on such market, such other market on which the common stock is traded) for the twelve (12) month period ending with the determination date. executive compensation recoupment policies in march 2022, the company adopted an executive compensation recoupment policy (the 2022 policy ) that applies to both cash and equity incentive compensation for executive officers. under the 2022 policy, if we are required to prepare an accounting restatement for one or more periods due to the material noncompliance of the company with any financial reporting requirement under the u.s. federal securities laws, the board or a committee of independent directors authorized by the board will investigate the circumstances to determine whether an act or omission of a current or former executive officer, involving fraud or intentional misconduct, contributed to the circumstances resulting in the restatement. following the investigation, we may require repayment of certain incentive-based compensation received by the executive officer in the three-year period preceding restatement. in november 2023, the company adopted a new executive compensation recovery policy (the 2023 policy ) for purposes of complying with section 10d of the exchange act and nasdaq listing standards. the 2023 policy provides that, in the event the company is required to prepare an accounting restatement on or after october 2, 2023 (the effective date ) due to the material noncompliance of the company with any financial reporting requirement under the u.s. federal securities laws, the company will act to recover the amount of incentive-based compensation received on or after the effective date, by its current and former section 16 officers, as applicable, in excess of the amount of incentive-based compensation that would have been received had it been determined based on the restated amount, subject to limited exceptions. in the event that an accounting restatement is not covered by the 2023 policy but is covered by the 2022 policy, the 2022 policy will apply. in the event that an accounting restatement could be covered by both the 2022 policy and 2023 policy, only the 2023 policy will apply. prohibition on hedging and certain other transactions we prohibit our directors, officers, and employees (or any of their designees) from directly or indirectly engaging in the following transactions with respect to securities of the company: selling short, including short sales against the box ; buying or selling put or call options; or purchasing financial instruments (including prepaid variable forward contracts, equity swaps, collars, and exchange funds), or otherwise engaging in transactions, that hedge or offset, or are designed to hedge or 22 offset, any decrease in the market value of securities of the company, whether through the use of traded securities, privately negotiated derivative securities, or synthetic financial instruments. in addition, we prohibit our directors, officers, and employees from purchasing company securities on margin, borrowing against company securities held in a margin account, or pledging company securities as collateral for a loan. compliance with internal revenue code section 162(m) for fiscal year 2024, the company will be unable to deduct compensation in excess of $1 million paid to certain executive officers, as specified under section 162(m) of the internal revenue code ( irc ). the compensation committee uses its judgment to authorize compensation payments that may be subject to the limit when the compensation committee believes such payments are appropriate and in the best interests of the company and its stockholders. policies and practices related to the grant of certain equity awards close in time to the release of material nonpublic information it is the company s practice to make stock-based compensation awards to executive officers in november of each year at a prescheduled compensation committee meeting, which may be close in time before or after the company publicly announces financial results for the prior completed quarter or fiscal year or when the company publicly provides an outlook for a future quarter or time period. during fiscal year 2024, the company did not time the disclosure of material non-public information for the purpose of affecting the value of executive compensation, nor did it grant any stock options to any of its executive officers. 23 compensation tables for named executive officers summary compensation table the following table summarizes compensation earned by, or awarded or paid to, our named executive officers for fiscal year 2024, fiscal year 2023, and fiscal year 2022. name and principal position year salary ($) stock awards ($)(1) non-equity incentive plan compensation ($)(2) all other compensation ($)(3) total ($) liam k. griffin 2024 1,175,002 15,523,244 1,370,289 27,992 18,096,527 chairman, chief executive officer 2023 1,170,502 14,554,926 1,509,604 26,404 17,261,436 and president 2022 1,124,289 13,087,793 2,423,906 31,174 16,667,162 kris sennesael 2024 627,600 4,213,415 459,192 24,220 5,324,427 senior vice president and 2023 604,200 4,142,435 486,606 20,921 5,254,162 chief financial officer 2022 585,092 4,131,556 788,306 17,384 5,522,338 reza kasnavi 2024 597,600 4,435,150 349,860 16,961 5,399,571 senior vice president, 2023 574,100 4,377,587 370,013 35,936 5,357,636 technology and manufacturing 2022 553,677 4,013,570 597,396 33,910 5,198,553 carlos s. bori 2024 594,101 4,435,150 349,860 26,337 5,405,448 senior vice president, 2023 538,900 4,377,587 347,530 26,162 5,290,179 sales and marketing 2022 515,327 4,013,570 557,713 15,324 5,101,934 robert j. terry 2024 559,800 3,659,046 327,703 34,457 4,581,006 senior vice president, 2023 538,200 3,605,110 346,887 27,150 4,517,347 general counsel and secretary 2022 518,885 3,305,147 559,858 22,731 4,406,621 ________________________ (1) the amounts in the stock awards column represent the grant date fair values, computed in accordance with the provisions of fasb asc topic 718 compensation stock compensation ( asc 718 ), of psas and rsus granted during the applicable fiscal year, without regard to estimated forfeiture rates. for fiscal years 2022, 2023, and 2024, assuming the highest level of performance achievement with respect to the psas, the grant date fair values of the stock awards would be as follows: mr. griffin (fy22: $16,912,789; fy23: $18,454,902; fy24: $19,723,254), mr. sennesael (fy22: $5,339,011; fy23: $5,252,414; fy24: $5,353,425), mr. kasnavi (fy22: $5,886,558; fy23: $5,550,558; fy24: $5,635,121), mr. bori (fy22: $5,186,558; fy23: $5,550,558; fy24: $5,635,121), and mr. terry (fy22: $4,271,095; fy23: $4,571,105; fy24: $4,649,065). for a description of the assumptions used in calculating the fair value of equity awards in fiscal year 2024 under asc 718, see note 9 of the company s financial statements included in the company s annual report on form 10-k filed with the sec on november 15, 2024. (2) reflects amounts paid to the named executive officers pursuant to the executive incentive plan adopted by the compensation committee for each year indicated. (3) all other compensation includes the company s contributions to the executive s 401(k) plan account, the cost of group term life insurance premiums, and financial planning benefits. for fiscal year 2024, it specifically includes $13,800 in company contributions to each named executive officer s 401(k) plan account, as well as $8,000, $4,250, $0, $9,398, and $15,136 in financial planning benefits for messrs. griffin, sennesael, kasnavi, bori and terry, respectively. 24 grants of plan-based awards table the following table summarizes all grants of plan-based awards made to the named executive officers in fiscal year 2024. estimated future payouts under non-equity incentive plan awards(1) estimated future payouts under equity incentive plan awards(2) all other stock awards: number of shares of stock or units (#)(3) grant date fair value of stock awards ($) name grant date threshold ($) target ($) maximum ($) threshold (#) target (#) maximum (#) liam k. griffin 940,000 1,880,000 3,760,000 11/07/2023 47,001 94,002 235,005 9,923,321(4) 11/07/2023 62,667 5,599,923(5) kris sennesael 315,000 630,000 1,260,000 11/07/2023 12,757 25,515 63,787 2,693,491(4) 11/07/2023 17,009 1,519,924(5) reza kasnavi 240,000 480,000 960,000 11/07/2023 13,428 26,857 67,142 2,835,159(4) 11/07/2023 17,905 1,599,991(5) carlos s. bori 240,000 480,000 960,000 11/07/2023 13,428 26,857 67,142 2,835,159(4) 11/07/2023 17,905 1,599,991(5) robert j. terry 224,800 449,600 899,200 11/07/2023 11,079 22,158 55,395 2,339,109(4) 11/07/2023 14,771 1,319,937(5) ________________________ (1) the amounts shown represent the potential value of awards earned under the incentive plan. the amounts actually paid to the named executive officers under the incentive plan are shown above in the summary compensation table under non-equity incentive plan compensation . for a more complete description of the incentive plan, please see description above under components of compensation short-term incentives . (2) the amounts shown represent shares potentially issuable pursuant to the fy24 psas granted on november 7, 2023, under the company s second amended and restated 2015 long-term incentive plan, as described above under components of compensation long-term stock-based compensation . (3) represents shares underlying rsu awards granted under the company s second amended and restated 2015 long-term incentive plan. each rsu award vests over four years at a rate of twenty-five percent (25%) per year commencing one year after the grant date and on each subsequent anniversary of the grant date for the following three years, provided the executive remains employed by the company through each such vesting date. (4) reflects the grant date fair value of the fy24 psas, computed in accordance with the provisions of asc 718, using (a) a monte carlo simulation (which weights the probability of multiple potential outcomes) to value the portion of the award related to tsr percentile ranking, and (b) a price of $89.36 per share, which was the closing sale price of the company s common stock on the nasdaq global select market on november 7, 2023, to value the portion of the award related to emerging revenue growth and ebitda margin percentile ranking, assuming performance at the target level. for a description of the assumptions used in calculating the fair value of equity awards granted in fiscal year 2024 under asc 718, see note 9 of the company s financial statements included in the company s annual report on form 10-k filed with the sec on november 15, 2024. 25 (5) reflects the grant date fair value of the rsus granted on november 7, 2023, computed in accordance with the provisions of asc 718 using a price of $89.36 per share, which was the closing price of the company s common stock on the nasdaq global select market on november 7, 2023. outstanding equity awards at fiscal year end table the following table summarizes the unvested stock awards held by the named executive officers as of the end of fiscal year 2024. none of our named executive officers held stock options as of the end of fiscal year 2024. stock awards name number of shares or units of stock that have not vested (#) market value of shares or units of stock that have not vested ($)(1) equity incentive plan awards: number of unearned shares, units or other rights that have not vested (#) equity incentive plan awards: market or payout value of unearned shares, units or other rights that have not vested ($)(1) liam k. griffin 7,645(2) 755,708 11,930(8) 1,179,281 15,906(3) 1,572,308 43,988(9) 4,348,214 43,988(4) 4,348,214 47,000(10) 4,645,950 62,667(5) 6,194,633 71,480(6) 7,065,798 14,253(7) 1,408,909 kris sennesael 2,363(2) 233,583 3,766(8) 372,269 5,021(3) 496,326 12,519(9) 1,237,503 12,519(4) 1,237,503 12,757(10) 1,261,029 17,009(5) 1,681,340 20,345(6) 2,011,103 3,868(7) 382,352 reza kasnavi 2,293(2) 226,663 3,658(8) 361,593 4,878(3) 482,190 13,230(9) 1,307,786 13,230(4) 1,307,786 13,428(10) 1,327,358 17,905(5) 1,769,909 21,498(6) 2,125,077 4,072(7) 402,517 carlos s. bori 2,015(2) 199,183 3,658(8) 361,593 4,878(3) 482,190 13,230(9) 1,307,786 13,230(4) 1,307,786 13,428(10) 1,327,358 17,905(5) 1,769,909 21,498(6) 2,125,077 4,072(7) 402,517 robert j. terry 1,876(2) 185,443 3,012(8) 297,736 4,016(3) 396,982 10,895(9) 1,076,971 10,895(4) 1,076,971 11,078(10) 1,095,060 14,771(5) 1,460,113 17,706(6) 1,750,238 3,360(7) 332,136 ________________________ (1) reflects a price of $98.85 per share, which was the closing sale price of the company s common stock on the nasdaq global select market on september 27, 2024. (2) represents shares issuable under an rsu award granted on november 11, 2020, under the company s second amended and restated 2015 long-term incentive plan. the rsu award vested at a rate of 25% per year on each anniversary of the grant date until it became fully vested on november 11, 2024. 26 (3) represents shares issuable under an rsu award granted on november 10, 2021, under the company s second amended and restated 2015 long-term incentive plan. the rsu award vests at a rate of 25% per year on each anniversary of the grant date through november 10, 2025. (4) represents shares issuable under an rsu award granted on november 8, 2022, under the company s second amended and restated 2015 long-term incentive plan. the rsu award vests at a rate of 25% per year on each anniversary of the grant date through november 8, 2026. (5) represents shares issuable under an rsu award granted on november 7, 2023, under the company s second amended and restated 2015 long-term incentive plan. the rsu award vests at a rate of 25% per year on each anniversary of the grant date through november 7, 2027. (6) represents shares issuable under the fiscal year 2023 psas ( fy23 psas ) (awarded on november 8, 2022) with respect to the emerging revenue growth metric measured over a one-year performance period consisting of the company s fiscal year 2023, assuming achievement at the maximum level of performance, one hundred percent (100%) of which were issued on november 8, 2024. also represents shares issuable under the fy23 psas with respect to the ebitda margin percentile ranking metric measured over a two-year performance period consisting of the company s fiscal years 2023 and 2024, assuming achievement with respect to such metric of 125% of the target level of performance, one hundred percent (100%) of which were issued on november 8, 2024. (7) represents shares issuable under the fy24 psas (awarded on november 7, 2023, as described above under components of compensation long-term stock-based compensation ) with respect to the emerging revenue growth metric measured over a one-year performance period consisting of the company s fiscal year 2024, assuming achievement at 61% of the target level of performance. one hundred percent (100%) of the shares to be earned under the fy24 psas with respect to this metric will be issued on november 7, 2025, to the extent earned and provided that the executive meets the continued employment condition. (8) represents shares issuable under the fiscal year 2022 psas (the fy22 psas ) with respect to the tsr percentile ranking metric, assuming achievement at the threshold level of performance. this portion of the fy22 psas, which was subject to a three-year performance period, would have been issued on november 10, 2024, had it been achieved. (9) represents shares issuable under the fy23 psas with respect to the tsr percentile ranking metric, assuming achievement at the target level of performance. this portion of the fy23 psas, which is subject to a three-year performance period, will be issued on november 8, 2025, to the extent earned and provided that the executive meets the continued employment condition. (10) represents shares issuable under the fy24 psas (awarded on november 7, 2023, as described above under components of compensation long-term stock-based compensation ) with respect to the tsr percentile ranking metric, assuming achievement at the threshold level of performance. this portion of the fy24 psas, which is subject to a three-year performance period, will be issued on november 7, 2026, to the extent earned and provided that the executive meets the continued employment condition. also represents shares issuable under the fy24 psas with respect to the ebitda margin percentile ranking metric measured over a two-year performance period consisting of the company s fiscal years 2024 and 2025, assuming achievement at the target level of performance. this portion of the fy24 psas will be issued on november 7, 2025, to the extent earned and provided that the executive meets the continued employment condition. 27 option exercises and stock vested table the following table summarizes the named executive officers option exercises and stock award vesting during fiscal year 2024. option awards stock awards name number of shares acquired on exercise (#) value realized on exercise ($)(1) number of shares acquired on vesting (#) value realized on vesting ($)(2) liam k. griffin 80,117 7,172,834 kris sennesael 12,770 157,227 24,828 2,223,633 reza kasnavi 24,060 2,154,078 carlos s. bori 23,782 2,129,361 robert j. terry 20,183 1,807,159 ________________________ (1) the value realized on exercise is based on the amount by which the market price of a share of the company s common stock at the time of exercise exceeded the applicable exercise price per share of the exercised option. (2) the value realized upon vesting is determined by multiplying (a) the number of shares underlying the stock awards that vested, by (b) the closing price of the company s common stock on the nasdaq global select market on the applicable vesting date. potential payments upon termination or change in control mr. griffin on may 10, 2023, in connection with the expiration, in accordance with its terms, of the amended and restated change in control / severance agreement between the company and mr. griffin, the company entered into a second amended and restated change in control / severance agreement with mr. griffin (the griffin agreement ). the griffin agreement sets out severance benefits that become payable if, while employed by the company, other than following a change in control, mr. griffin either (i) is terminated without cause, or (ii) terminates his employment for good reason. the severance benefits provided to mr. griffin under either of these circumstances would consist of: (i) a lump-sum payment equal to two (2) times the sum of (a) his then-current annual base salary immediately prior to such termination and (b) the bonus amount (as defined below); (ii) full acceleration of the vesting of all of mr. griffin s outstanding stock options, which stock options would become exercisable for a period of two (2) years after the termination date (but not beyond the expiration of their respective maximum terms), full acceleration of the vesting of all outstanding restricted stock awards (including awards of restricted stock units), and the right to receive the number of performance shares under outstanding psas that are earned but unissued and that he would have earned had he remained employed through the end of the applicable performance period; and (iii) provided he is eligible for and timely elects to continue receiving group medical coverage (and provided the provision of such payments will not violate any applicable nondiscrimination laws), certain cobra continuation for him and his eligible dependents ( cobra continuation ) for up to fifteen (15) months after the termination date. the bonus amount is an amount equal to the greater of (x) the average of the short-term cash incentive awards received for the three (3) years prior to the year in which the termination occurs, and (y) the target annual short-term cash incentive award for the year in which the termination occurs. the griffin agreement also sets out severance benefits that become payable if, within the period of time commencing three (3) months prior to and ending two (2) years following a change in control, mr. griffin s employment is either (i) terminated by the company without cause, or (ii) terminated by him for good reason (a qualifying termination ). the severance benefits provided to mr. griffin in such circumstances would consist of the following: (i) a lump-sum payment equal to two and one-half (2 1 / 2 ) times the sum of (a) his annual base salary immediately prior to the change in control, and (b) the cic bonus amount (as defined below); (ii) all of mr. griffin s then-outstanding stock options would become exercisable for a period of thirty (30) months after the 28 termination date (but not beyond the expiration of their respective maximum terms); and (iii) cobra continuation for up to eighteen (18) months after the termination date. the cic bonus amount is an amount equal to the greater of (x) the average of the annual short-term cash incentive awards received for the three (3) years prior to the year in which the change of control occurs and (y) the target annual short-term cash incentive award for the year in which the change of control occurs. the griffin agreement also provides that in the event of a qualifying termination, mr. griffin is entitled to full acceleration of the vesting of all of his outstanding equity awards (including stock options, restricted stock awards, rsu awards, and all earned but unissued performance-based equity awards). at the time of a change in control, all such outstanding equity awards would continue to be subject to the same time-based vesting schedule to which the awards were subject prior to the change in control (including performance-based equity awards that are deemed earned at the time of the change in control as described below). for performance-based equity awards where the change in control occurs prior to the end of the applicable performance period, such awards would be deemed earned as to the greater of (i) the target level of shares for such awards, or (ii) if such calculation is determined to be practicable by the compensation committee, the number of shares that would have been earned pursuant to the terms of such awards based upon performance up through and including the day prior to the date of the change in control. in the event that the successor or surviving company does not agree to assume, or to substitute for, such outstanding equity awards on substantially similar terms with substantially equivalent economic benefits as exist for such award immediately prior to the change in control, then such awards would accelerate in full as of the change in control. in the event of mr. griffin s death or permanent disability (within the meaning of section 22(e)(3) of the irc), the griffin agreement provides for full acceleration of the vesting of all then-outstanding equity awards subject to time-based vesting (including stock options, restricted stock awards, rsu awards, and all performance-based equity awards where the performance period has ended and the shares are earned but unissued). the griffin agreement also provides that if mr. griffin s death or permanent disability occurs prior to the end of the performance period of a performance-based equity award, each such award would be deemed earned as to the greater of (i) the target level of shares for such award, or (ii) the number of shares that would have been earned pursuant to the terms of such award had he remained employed through the end of the performance period, and such earned shares would become vested and issuable to him after the performance period ends. in addition, all outstanding stock options would remain exercisable for a period of twelve (12) months following the termination of employment (but not beyond the expiration of their respective maximum terms). all of mr. griffin s equity awards that were outstanding as of september 27, 2024, are subject to the terms described above for the griffin agreement. the griffin agreement is intended to be exempt from or compliant with section 409a of the irc and has an initial two (2) year term from may 10, 2023, and thereafter renews automatically on an annual basis for up to five (5) additional years unless either the company or mr. griffin timely provides a notice of non-renewal to the other prior to the end of the then-current term. the payments due to mr. griffin under the griffin agreement are subject to potential reduction in the event that such payments would otherwise become subject to excise tax incurred under section 4999 of the irc, if such reduction would result in his retaining a larger amount, on an after-tax basis, than if he had received all of the payments due. additionally, the griffin agreement requires that mr. griffin sign a release of claims in favor of the company before he is eligible to receive any benefits under the griffin agreement and contains a non-solicitation provision applicable to mr. griffin while he is employed by the company and for twelve (12) months following the termination of his employment. the terms change in control, cause, and good reason are each defined in the griffin agreement. change in control means, in summary: (i) the acquisition by a person or a group of 40% or more of the outstanding stock of 29 the company; (ii) a change, without approval by the board of directors, of a majority of the board of directors of the company; (iii) the acquisition of the company by means of a reorganization, merger, consolidation, or asset sale; or (iv) stockholder approval of a liquidation or dissolution of the company. cause means, in summary: (i) deliberate dishonesty that is significantly detrimental to the best interests of the company; (ii) conduct constituting an act of moral turpitude; (iii) willful disloyalty or insubordination; or (iv) incompetent performance or substantial or continuing inattention to or neglect of duties. good reason means, in summary: (i) a material diminution in his base compensation, authority, duties, responsibilities, or budget over which he retains authority; (ii) a requirement that mr. griffin report to a corporate officer or employee instead of reporting directly to the board of directors; (iii) a material change in his office location; or (iv) any action or inaction constituting a material breach by the company of the terms of the agreement. mr. sennesael, mr. kasnavi, mr. bori, and mr. terry the company entered into amended and restated change in control / severance agreements with each of mr. sennesael, mr. kasnavi, mr. bori, and mr. terry on may 10, 2023, respectively. each such amended and restated change in control / severance agreement is referred to herein as a cic agreement. each cic agreement sets out severance benefits that become payable if the executive officer experiences a qualifying termination. the severance benefits provided to the executive in such circumstances would consist of the following: (i) a lump sum payment equal to one and one-half (1 1 / 2 ) times the sum of (a) all of the executive s annual base salary immediately prior to the change in control, and (b) the cic bonus amount; (ii) all of the executive s then-outstanding stock options would remain exercisable for a period of eighteen (18) months after the termination date (but not beyond the expiration of their respective maximum terms); and (iii) cobra continuation for up to eighteen (18) months after the termination date. each cic agreement also provides that in the event of a qualifying termination, the executive is entitled to full acceleration of the vesting of all of his outstanding equity awards (including stock options, restricted stock awards, rsu awards, and all earned but unissued performance-based equity awards). at the time of a change in control, all such outstanding equity awards would continue to be subject to the same time-based vesting schedule to which the awards were subject prior to the change in control (including performance-based equity awards that are deemed earned at the time of the change in control as described below). for performance-based equity awards where the change in control occurs prior to the end of the performance period, such awards would be deemed earned as to the greater of (i) the target level of shares for such awards, or (ii) if such calculation is determined to be practicable by the compensation committee, the number of shares that would have been earned pursuant to the terms of such awards based upon performance up through and including the day prior to the date of the change in control. in the event that the successor or surviving company does not agree to assume, or to substitute for, such outstanding equity awards on substantially similar terms with substantially equivalent economic benefits as exist for such award immediately prior to the change in control, then such awards would accelerate in full as of the change in control. each cic agreement also sets out severance benefits outside a change in control that become payable if the executive s employment is terminated by the company without cause. the severance benefits provided to the executive under such circumstance would consist of the following: (i) biweekly compensation continuation payments commencing not more than sixty (60) days after such termination and continuing for a period of twelve (12) months, with each such compensation continuation payment being equal to the aggregate payment amount divided by twenty-six (26), where the aggregate payment is equal to the sum of (x) his then-current annual base salary, and (y) any short-term cash incentive award then due; (ii) all then-vested outstanding stock options would remain exercisable for a period of twelve (12) months after the termination date (but not beyond the expiration of their respective maximum terms); and (iii) cobra continuation coverage for up to twelve (12) months after the termination date. 30 in the event of the executive s death or permanent disability (within the meaning of section 22(e)(3) of the irc), each cic agreement provides for full acceleration of the vesting of all then-outstanding equity awards subject to time-based vesting (including stock options, restricted stock awards, rsu awards, and all performance-based equity awards where the performance period has ended and the shares are earned but unissued). each cic agreement also provides that for a performance-based equity award where the executive s death or permanent disability occurs prior to the end of the performance period, such award would be deemed earned as to the greater of (i) the target level of shares for such award, or (ii) the number of shares that would have been earned pursuant to the terms of such award had the executive remained employed through the end of the performance period, and such earned shares would become vested and issuable to the executive after the performance period ends. in addition, all outstanding stock options would remain exercisable for a period of twelve (12) months following the termination of employment (but not beyond the expiration of their respective maximum terms). all of the equity awards that are outstanding as of september 27, 2024 for each of mr. sennesael, mr. kasnavi, mr. bori, and mr. terry are subject to the terms described above for the cic agreements. each cic agreement is intended to be exempt from or compliant with section 409a of the irc and has an initial two (2) year term, and thereafter renews automatically on an annual basis for up to five (5) additional years unless either the company or the executive timely provides a notice of non-renewal to the other prior to the end of the then-current term. the payments due to each executive under his or her cic agreement are subject to potential reduction in the event that such payments would otherwise become subject to excise tax incurred under section 4999 of the irc, if such reduction would result in the executive retaining a larger amount, on an after-tax basis, than if he had received all of the payments due. additionally, each cic agreement requires that the executive sign a release of claims in favor of the company before he is eligible to receive any benefits under the agreement. each cic agreement also contains non-solicitation provisions applicable to the executive while he is employed by the company and for a period of twelve (12) months following the termination of his employment. the terms change in control, cause, and good reason are each defined in the cic agreements. change in control means, in summary: (i) the acquisition by a person or a group of 40% or more of the outstanding stock of the company; (ii) a change, without approval by the board of directors, of a majority of the board of directors of the company; (iii) the acquisition of the company by means of a reorganization, merger, consolidation, or asset sale; or (iv) stockholder approval of a liquidation or dissolution of the company. cause means, in summary: (i) deliberate dishonesty that is significantly detrimental to the best interests of the company; (ii) conduct constituting an act of moral turpitude; (iii) willful disloyalty or insubordination; or (iv) incompetent performance or substantial or continuing inattention to or neglect of duties. good reason means, in summary: (i) a material diminution in the executive s base compensation, authority, duties, or responsibilities; (ii) a material diminution in the authority, duties, or responsibilities of the executive s supervisor; (iii) a material change in the executive s office location; or (iv) any action or inaction constituting a material breach by the company of the terms of the agreement. the following table summarizes the payments and benefits that would be made by the company to the named executive officers as of september 27, 2024, in the following circumstances as of such date: termination without cause outside of a change in control; termination without cause or for good reason in connection with a change in control; and in the event of a termination of employment because of death or disability. 31 the accelerated equity values in the table reflect a price of $98.85 per share, which was the closing sale price of the company s common stock on the nasdaq global select market on september 27, 2024. the table does not reflect any equity awards made after september 27, 2024. name benefit termination w/o cause outside change in control ($)(1) termination w/o cause or for good reason, after change in control ($) death/ disability ($) liam k. griffin(2) salary and short-term incentive 6,119,006(3) 7,648,758(4) accelerated rsus 12,870,863 12,870,863 12,870,863 accelerated psas (5) 23,064,671 23,064,671 23,064,671 medical 37,903 45,483 total 42,092,443 43,629,775 35,935,534 kris sennesael(2) salary and short-term incentive 630,000(6) 1,890,000(7) accelerated rsus 3,648,751 3,648,751 accelerated psas (5) 6,515,302 6,515,302 medical 19,569 29,354 total 649,569 12,083,407 10,164,053 reza kasnavi(2) salary and short-term incentive 600,000(6) 1,620,000(7) accelerated rsus 3,786,548 3,786,548 accelerated psas (5) 6,810,963 6,810,963 medical 9,485 14,227 total 609,485 12,231,738 10,597,511 carlos s. bori(2) salary and short-term incentive 600,000(6) 1,620,000(7) accelerated rsus 3,759,068 3,759,068 accelerated psas (5) 6,810,963 6,810,963 medical 30,322 45,483 total 630,322 12,235,514 10,570,031 robert j. terry(2) salary and short-term incentive 562,000(6) 1,517,400(7) accelerated rsus 3,119,508 3,119,508 accelerated psas (5) 5,613,098 5,613,098 medical 30,322 45,483 total 592,322 10,295,489 8,732,606 ________________________ (1) for mr. griffin, includes amounts payable pursuant to a termination for good reason outside of a change in control. (2) excludes the value of accrued vacation/paid time off required by law to be paid upon termination. (3) represents an amount equal to two (2) times the sum of (a) mr. griffin s annual base salary as of september 27, 2024, and (b) an incentive plan payment, which is equal to the three (3) year average of the actual incentive payments made to mr. griffin for the company s fiscal year ended october 1, 2021 ( fiscal year 2021 ), fiscal year 2022, and fiscal year 2023, since such average is greater than the target short-term cash incentive award for fiscal year 2024. (4) represents an amount equal to two and one-half (2 ) times the sum of (a) mr. griffin s annual base salary as of september 27, 2024, and (b) an incentive plan payment, which is equal to the three (3) year average of the actual incentive payments made to mr. griffin for fiscal years 2021, 2022, and 2023, since such average is greater than the target short-term cash incentive award for fiscal year 2024. (5) represents the value of psas that were unvested and outstanding as of september 27, 2024, in accordance with item 402(j) of regulation s-k, using the following assumptions: (a) achievement at the target level of 32 performance for the fy22 psas (3-year tsr percentile ranking metric) scheduled to vest on november 10, 2024, based on the company s tsr relative to the applicable peer group for fiscal years 2022 and 2023 tracking below the target level of performance; (b) achievement at 200% of the target level of performance for the fy23 psas emerging revenue growth metric scheduled to vest on november 8, 2024, based on the company s actual achievement at the maximum level of performance with respect to the performance metric measured over a one-year performance period consisting of the company s fiscal year 2023; (c) achievement at 125% of the target level of performance for the fy23 psas ebitda margin percentile ranking metric scheduled to vest on november 8, 2024, based on the company s tracking of achievement between the target and maximum levels of performance with respect to the metric measured over a two-year performance period consisting of the company s fiscal year 2023 and fiscal year 2024; (d) achievement at the target level of performance for the fy23 psas (3-year tsr percentile ranking metric) scheduled to vest on november 8, 2025, based on the company s tsr relative to the applicable peer group for fiscal year 2023 tracking below the target level of performance; (e) achievement at 100% of the target level of performance for the fy24 psas emerging revenue growth metric scheduled to vest on november 7, 2025, based on the company s actual achievement at 61% of the target level of performance with respect to the performance metric measured over a one-year performance period consisting of the company s fiscal year 2024; (f) achievement at 100% of the target level of performance for the fy24 psas (ebitda margin percentile ranking metric) scheduled to vest on november 7, 2025, based on the company s tracking of achievement between the threshold and target levels of performance with respect to the metric measured over a two-year performance period consisting of the company s fiscal year 2024 and fiscal year 2025; and (g) achievement at the target level of performance for the fy24 psas (3-year tsr percentile ranking metric) scheduled to vest on november 7, 2026, based on the company s tsr relative to the applicable peer group for fiscal year 2024 tracking below the target level of performance. (6) represents an amount equal to the named executive officer s annual base salary as of september 27, 2024. (7) represents an amount equal to one and one-half (1 ) times the sum of (a) the named executive officer s annual base salary as of september 27, 2024, and (b) an incentive plan payment, which is equal to the named executive officer s target short-term cash incentive award for fiscal year 2024, since such amount is greater than the three (3) year average of the actual incentive payments made to the named executive officer for fiscal years 2021, 2022, and 2023. ceo pay ratio following is an estimate, prepared under applicable sec rules, of the ratio of the annual total compensation of our chief executive officer to the median of the annual total compensation of our other employees. for fiscal year 2024: the annual total compensation of our chief executive officer was $18,096,527. the annual total compensation of our median compensated employee was $31,541. based on the foregoing, we estimate that our chief executive officer s total annual compensation was approximately 574 times that of our median employee. to determine the median of the annual total compensation of our employees, we applied the following methodology and material assumptions: we did not use the de minimis exception to exclude any non-u.s. employees. we have a globally diverse workforce with total headcount of approximately 10,100 as of september 27, 2024, of which approximately 75% are located outside the united states, primarily in locations employing large direct labor forces such as mexico and singapore where wages are significantly lower than in the united states. the median employee within our employee population was identified, consistent with prior years, as of the last day of our fiscal year, or september 27, 2024, and is a full-time employee in our mexicali, mexico facility. 33 to identify the median employee, we used a consistently applied compensation measure that included total taxable earnings paid to our employees in the most recently completed taxable year in their respective jurisdictions. this included base salary, overtime pay, shift premiums, recognition bonuses, annual cash incentive awards, and long-term stock-based incentive awards. we annualized the compensation of permanent, full-time, and part-time employees who were hired after the beginning of the most recently completed taxable year in their respective jurisdictions. using this consistently applied compensation measure, we identified an employee at the median and calculated such employee s total compensation for fiscal year 2024 in accordance with item 402(c)(2)(x) of regulation s-k. we did not use any cost-of-living adjustments in identifying the median employee. the annual total compensation of our chief executive officer is the amount reported in the total column of our summary compensation table for fiscal year 2024. we believe our pay ratio presented above is a reasonable estimate calculated in a manner consistent with item 402(u) of regulation s-k. the sec rules for identifying the median compensated employee and calculating the pay ratio based on that employee s annual total compensation allow companies to adopt a variety of methodologies, to apply certain exclusions, and to make reasonable estimates and assumptions. as a result, the pay ratio reported by other companies may not be comparable to the pay ratio reported above, as other companies may have different employment and compensation practices and may utilize different methodologies, exclusions, estimates, and assumptions in calculating their own pay ratios. director compensation the board of directors sets the compensation for the company s non-employee directors, after receiving the recommendations of the compensation committee. in formulating its recommendations, the compensation committee seeks and receives input from aon related to the amounts, terms, and conditions of director cash compensation and stock-based compensation awards, with the goal of establishing non-employee director compensation that is similar to, and competitive with, the compensation of non-employee directors at peer companies in the semiconductor industry. cash compensation non-employee directors are paid, in quarterly installments, an annual retainer of $90,000. additional annual retainers for chairman, lead independent director, and/or committee service (paid in quarterly installments) are as follows: any non-employee chairman of the board ($130,000); the lead independent director, if one has been appointed ($50,000); the chairman of the audit committee ($30,000); the chairman of the compensation committee ($20,000); the chairman of the nominating and corporate governance committee ($15,000); non-chair member of audit committee ($15,000); non-chair member of compensation committee ($10,000); and non-chair member of nominating and corporate governance committee ($7,500). in addition, the compensation committee continues to retain discretion to recommend to the full board of directors that additional cash payments be made to a non-employee director for extraordinary service during a fiscal year. equity compensation currently, following each annual meeting of stockholders, each non-employee director who is reelected will receive a grant of rsus having a value of approximately $225,000. any newly appointed non-employee director will receive an initial equity grant of rsus having a value of approximately $225,000. the number of shares subject to a non-employee director s initial rsu award or annual award is determined by dividing the approximate value of 34 the award, as stated above, by the average closing price per share of the company s common stock as reported on the nasdaq global select market (or if the common stock is not then traded on such market, such other market on which the common stock is traded) for each trading day during the 30 consecutive trading day period ending on, and including, the grant date. unless otherwise determined by the board of directors, (a) a non-employee director s initial equity grant of rsus will vest in three (3) equal annual installments on the first three anniversaries of the date of grant, and (b) a non-employee director s annual equity grant of rsus will vest on the first anniversary of the date of grant. in the event of a change in control of the company, any outstanding options and rsus awarded under the 2008 director long-term incentive plan will become fully exercisable and deemed fully vested, respectively. no director who is also an employee receives separate compensation for services rendered as a director. mr. griffin is currently the only director who is also an employee of the company. director compensation table the following table summarizes the compensation paid to the company s non-employee directors for fiscal year 2024. name fees earned or paid in cash ($) stock awards ($)(1)(2) total ($) christine king, lead independent director 172,500 225,042 397,542 alan s. batey 97,500 225,042 322,542 kevin l. beebe 102,500 225,042 327,542 eric j. guerin 102,500 225,042 327,542 suzanne e. mcbride 95,000 225,042 320,042 david p. mcglade 125,000 225,042 350,042 robert a. schriesheim 112,500 225,042 337,542 maryann turcke 95,000 225,042 320,042 ________________________ (1) the non-employee members of the board of directors who were directors on september 27, 2024 held the following aggregate number of unexercised stock options and unvested rsu awards as of such date: name number of securities underlying unexercised options number of shares subject to unvested rsus christine king, lead independent director 2,272 alan s. batey 2,272 kevin l. beebe 2,272 eric j. guerin 2,718 suzanne e. mcbride 2,721 david p. mcglade 2,272 robert a. schriesheim 2,272 maryann turcke 3,656 (2) reflects, for each non-employee director elected at the 2024 annual meeting of stockholders (i.e., mses. king, mcbride, and turcke and messrs. batey, beebe, guerin, mcglade, and schriesheim), the grant date fair value of 35 2,272 rsus granted on may 14, 2024, computed in accordance with the provisions of asc 718 using a price of $99.05 per share. director stock ownership requirements we have adopted director stock ownership guidelines with the objective of more closely aligning the interests of our directors with those of our stockholders. the minimum number of shares of the company s common stock that the director stock ownership guidelines require non-employee directors to hold while serving in their capacity as directors is the director base compensation (currently $90,000) multiplied by five (5), divided by the fair market value of the company s common stock (rounded to the nearest 100 shares). for purposes of the director stock ownership guidelines, the fair market value of the company s common stock is the average closing price per share of the company s common stock as reported on the nasdaq global select market (or if the common stock is not then traded on such market, such other market on which the common stock is traded) for the twelve (12) month period ending with the determination date. all of our directors have met the stock ownership guidelines as of the date hereof (with the exception of ms. turcke who is not required to comply with the guidelines until the fifth anniversary of her appointment to the board of directors). compensation committee interlocks and insider participation the compensation committee of the board of directors currently consists of ms. king (chairman), mr. batey, and mr. schriesheim. no member of this committee was at any time during fiscal year 2024 an officer or employee of the company, was formerly an officer of the company or any of its subsidiaries, or had any employment relationship with the company or any of its subsidiaries. no executive officer of the company has served as a director or member of the compensation committee (or other committee serving an equivalent function) of any other entity, where one of such entity s executive officers served as a director of the company or a member of the compensation committee. compensation committee report the compensation committee has reviewed and discussed the compensation discussion and analysis included herein with management, and based on the review and discussions, the compensation committee recommended to the board of directors that the compensation discussion and analysis be included in the annual report on this form 10-k for the year ended september 27, 2024. the compensation committee christine king, chairman alan s. batey robert a. schriesheim 36 item 12. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management and related stockholder matters. security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management to the company s knowledge, the following table sets forth the beneficial ownership of the company s common stock as of january 17, 2025, by the following individuals or entities: (i) each person or entity who beneficially owns five percent (5%) or more of the outstanding shares of the company s common stock as of january 17, 2025; (ii) the named executive officers (as defined above in item 11 executive compensation ); (iii) each director and nominee for director; and (iv) all current executive officers and directors of the company, as a group. beneficial ownership is determined in accordance with the rules of the sec, is not necessarily indicative of beneficial ownership for any other purpose, and does not constitute an admission that the named stockholder is a direct or indirect beneficial owner of those shares. as of january 17, 2025, there were 160,741,022 shares of the company s common stock outstanding. in computing the number of shares of company common stock beneficially owned by a person and the percentage ownership of that person, shares of company common stock that are subject to stock options or other rights held by that person that are currently exercisable or that will become exercisable within sixty (60) days of january 17, 2025, are deemed outstanding. these shares are not, however, deemed outstanding for the purpose of computing the percentage ownership of any other person. names and addresses of beneficial owners(1) number of shares beneficially owned(2) percent of class the vanguard group, inc. 18,656,173(3) 11.6 % blackrock, inc. 16,129,698(4) 10.0 % alan s. batey 9,723 (*) kevin l. beebe 50,733 (*) carlos s. bori 45,961(5) (*) eric j. guerin 5,318 (*) liam k. griffin 211,681(5) (*) reza kasnavi 20,911(5) (*) christine king 23,057 (*) suzanne e. mcbride 5,326 (*) david p. mcglade 44,994 (*) robert a. schriesheim 60,881 (*) kris sennesael 117,175 (*) robert j. terry 17,214(5) (*) maryann turcke 3,463 (*) all current directors and executive officers as a group (14 persons) 642,789(5) (*) ________________________ * less than 1% (1) unless otherwise set forth in the following notes, each person s address is the address of our principal executive offices at skyworks solutions, inc., 5260 california avenue, irvine, ca 92617, and stockholders have sole voting and sole investment power with respect to the shares, except to the extent such power may be shared by a spouse or otherwise subject to applicable community property laws. 37 (2) the table does not reflect the number of shares of company common stock to be issued pursuant to unvested restricted stock units (the unvested rsus ) and earned, but unissued, performance share awards subject to time-based vesting only (the unvested psas ), in each case that are not scheduled to vest within sixty (60) days of january 17, 2025, as follows: mr. batey 2,272 shares under unvested rsus; mr. beebe 2,272 shares under unvested rsus; mr. bori 38,234 shares under unvested rsus and 4,072 shares under unvested psas; mr. guerin 2,272 shares under unvested rsus; mr. griffin 129,434 shares under unvested rsus and 14,253 shares under unvested psas; mr. kasnavi 43,653 shares under unvested rsus and 4,072 shares under unvested psas; ms. king 2,272 shares under unvested rsus; ms. mcbride 2,272 shares under unvested rsus; mr. mcglade 2,272 shares under unvested rsus; mr. schriesheim 2,272 shares under unvested rsus; mr. sennesael 47,996 shares under unvested rsus and 3,868 shares under unvested psas; mr. terry 33,896 shares under unvested rsus and 3,360 shares under unvested psas; ms. turcke 2,964 shares under unvested rsus; current directors and executive officers as a group (14 persons) 336,576 shares under unvested rsus and 31,711 shares under unvested psas. (3) consists of shares beneficially owned by the vanguard group, inc. ( vanguard ), which has sole voting power with respect to zero shares, shared voting power with respect to 203,684 shares, sole dispositive power with respect to 17,980,820 shares, and shared dispositive power with respect to 675,353 shares. with respect to the information relating to vanguard, we have relied on information disclosed by vanguard on a schedule 13g/a filed with the sec on february 13, 2024. the address of vanguard is 100 vanguard blvd., malvern, pa 19355. (4) consists of shares beneficially owned by blackrock, inc. ( blackrock ), in its capacity as a parent holding company of various subsidiaries under rule 13d1(b)(1)(ii)(g). in its capacity as a parent holding company or control person, blackrock has sole voting power with respect to 14,766,933 shares and sole dispositive power with respect to 16,129,698 shares which are held by the following of its subsidiaries: blackrock life limited, blackrock international limited, blackrock advisors, llc, aperio group, llc, blackrock france sas, blackrock (netherlands) b.v., blackrock fund advisors, blackrock institutional trust company, national association, blackrock asset management ireland limited, blackrock financial management, inc., blackrock japan co., ltd., blackrock asset management schweiz ag, blackrock investment management, llc, blackrock investment management (uk) limited, spiderrock advisors, llc, blackrock asset management canada limited, blackrock (luxembourg) s.a., blackrock investment management (australia) limited, blackrock advisors (uk) limited, blackrock asset management north asia limited, blackrock (singapore) limited, and blackrock fund managers ltd. with respect to the information relating to blackrock and its affiliated entities, we have relied on information disclosed by blackrock on a schedule 13g filed with the sec on september 10, 2024. the address of blackrock is 50 hudson yards, new york, ny 10001. (5) includes shares held in the company s 401(k) savings and investment plan as of january 17, 2025. 38 equity compensation plan information as of september 27, 2024, the company has the following equity compensation plans under which its equity securities were authorized for issuance to its employees and/or directors: the 2002 employee stock purchase plan, as amended the non-qualified employee stock purchase plan, as amended the amended and restated 2008 director long-term incentive plan the second amended and restated 2015 long-term incentive plan except for the non-qualified employee stock purchase plan, as amended (the non-qualified espp ), each of the foregoing equity compensation plans was approved by the company s stockholders. a description of the material features of the non-qualified espp is provided below under the heading non-qualified employee stock purchase plan . the following table presents information about these plans as of september 27, 2024. plan category number of securities to be issued upon exercise of outstanding options, warrants, and rights (#)(a) weighted average exercise price of outstanding options, warrants, and rights ($)(b) number of securities remaining available for future issuance under equity compensation plans (excluding securities reflected in column (a)) (#)(c) equity compensation plans approved by security holders 11,576(1) 83.52 14,227,060(2) equity compensation plans not approved by security holders 474,405(3) total 11,576 83.52 14,701,465 ________________________ (1) excludes 2,754,129 unvested shares under restricted stock and rsu awards and 1,568,746 unvested shares under psas, which number assumes achievement of performance goals under outstanding psas at target levels. (2) includes 2,086,629 shares available for future issuance under the 2002 employee stock purchase plan, as amended, 11,638,048 shares available for future issuance under the second amended and restated 2015 long-term incentive plan, and 502,383 shares available for future issuance under the amended and restated 2008 director long-term incentive plan. (3) represents shares available under the non-qualified espp. non-qualified employee stock purchase plan we maintain the non-qualified espp to provide employees of the company and participating subsidiaries with an opportunity to acquire a proprietary interest in the company through the purchase, by means of payroll deductions, of shares of the company s common stock at a discount from the market price of the common stock at the time of purchase. the non-qualified espp is intended for use primarily by employees located outside the united states. under the plan, eligible employees may purchase common stock through payroll deductions of up to 15% of eligible compensation. the price per share is the lower of 85% of the market price at the beginning or end of each six-month offering period. 39 item 13. certain relationships and related transactions, and director independence. certain relationships and related transactions : other than compensation agreements and other arrangements which are described above in item 11 executive compensation, since september 30, 2023, there has not been a transaction or series of related transactions to which the company was or is a party involving an amount in excess of $120,000 and in which any director, executive officer, holder of more than five percent (5%) of any class of our voting securities, or any member of the immediate family of any of the foregoing persons, had or will have a direct or indirect material interest. our board of directors has adopted a written related person transaction approval policy that sets forth the company s policies and procedures for the review, approval, or ratification of any transaction required to be reported in its filings with the sec. the company s policy with regard to related person transactions is that all related person transactions between the company and any related person (as defined in item 404 of regulation s-k) or their affiliates, in which the amount involved is equal to or greater than $120,000, be reviewed by the company s general counsel and approved by the audit committee. in addition, the company s code of business conduct and ethics requires that employees discuss with the company s compliance officer any significant relationship (or transaction) that might raise doubt about such employee s ability to act in the best interest of the company. director independence : each year, the board of directors reviews the relationships that each director has with the company and with other parties. only those directors who do not have any of the categorical relationships that preclude them from being independent within the meaning of applicable nasdaq rules and who the board of directors affirmatively determines have no relationships that would interfere with the exercise of independent judgment in carrying out the responsibilities of a director are considered to be independent directors. the board of directors has reviewed a number of factors to evaluate the independence of each of its members. these factors include its members current and historic relationships with the company and its competitors, suppliers, and customers; their relationships with management and other directors; the relationships their current and former employers have with the company; and the relationships between the company and other companies of which a member of the company s board of directors is a director or executive officer. after evaluating these factors, the board of directors has determined that eight of the nine members of the board of directors, namely, alan s. batey, kevin l. beebe, eric j. guerin, christine king, suzanne e. mcbride, david p. mcglade, robert a. schriesheim, and maryann turcke, do not have any relationships that would interfere with the exercise of independent judgment in carrying out their responsibilities as directors and that each such director is an independent director of the company within the meaning of applicable nasdaq rules. 40 item 14. principal accounting fees and services. kpmg llp ( irvine, california , auditor firm id: 185 ) provided audit services to the company consisting of the annual audit of the company s 2024 consolidated financial statements contained in the company s annual report on form 10-k and reviews of the financial statements contained in the company s quarterly reports on form 10-q for fiscal year 2024. the following table summarizes the fees of kpmg llp billed to the company for the last two fiscal years. fee category fiscal year 2024 ($) % of total (%) fiscal year 2023 ($) % of total (%) audit fees(1) 2,622,000 70.0 2,421,240 97.0 audit-related fees(2) 306,026 8.2 43,974 1.7 tax fees(3) 818,008 21.8 32,000 1.3 total fees 3,746,034 100 2,497,214 100 ________________________ (1) audit fees consist of fees for the audit of our annual financial statements, review of the interim financial statements included in our quarterly reports on form 10-q, and statutory audits and related filings in various foreign locations. fiscal year 2024 and 2023 audit fees included fees for services incurred in connection with rendering an opinion under section 404 of the sarbanes-oxley act. fiscal year 2024 audit fees also included fees for the review of an auditor consent to incorporate by reference prior year financial statement opinions in a registration statement on form s-8 filed with the sec in june 2024. (2) audit-related fees consist of fees relating to the company s real-time system implementation assessment of certain enterprise resource planning software. (3) tax fees consist of fees for tax compliance and tax planning services. tax compliance services in fiscal year 2024 and 2023 primarily relate to the review of u.s. income tax matters, including the section 48d advanced manufacturing investment credit in fiscal year 2024. tax planning services, which in fiscal year 2024 relate to future changes in tax laws resulting from the beps project of the oecd, including pillar two, accounted for $55,000 of the total tax fees for fiscal year 2024. in 2003, the audit committee adopted a formal policy concerning approval of audit and non-audit services to be provided to the company by its independent registered public accounting firm, kpmg llp. the policy requires that all services provided by kpmg llp, including audit services and permitted audit-related and non-audit services, be preapproved by the audit committee. the audit committee preapproved all audit and non-audit services provided by kpmg llp during fiscal year 2024 and fiscal year 2023. 41 part iv item 15. exhibits, financial statement schedules. (a) the following are filed as part of this annual report on form 10-k: 1. index to financial statements page number of the original filing report of independent registered public accounting firm pages 38 through 39 consolidated statements of operations for the three years ended september 27, 2024 page 40 consolidated statements of comprehensive income for the three years ended september 27, 2024 page 41 consolidated balance sheets at september 27, 2024 and september 29, 2023 page 42 consolidated statements of cash flows for the three years ended september 27, 2024 page 43 consolidated statements of stockholders equity for the three years ended september 27, 2024 page 44 notes to consolidated financial statements pages 45 through 64 2. the schedule listed below is filed as part of this annual report on form 10-k: all required schedule information is included in the notes to consolidated financial statements or is omitted because it is either not required or not applicable. 3. the exhibits listed in the exhibit index immediately following this item 15 are filed as a part of this annual report on form 10-k. (b) exhibits the exhibits required by item 601 of regulation s-k are filed herewith and incorporated by reference herein. the response to this portion of item 15 is submitted under item 15(a)(3). 42 exhibit index exhibit number exhibit description form incorporated by reference filed herewith file no. exhibit filing date 2.1&#x5e; asset purchase agreement, dated as of april 22, 2021, by and between skyworks solutions, inc., and silicon laboratories inc. 8-k 001-05560 2.1 4/22/2021 3.1 restated certificate of incorporation 10-q 001-05560 3.1 8/8/2023 3.2 fourth amended and restated by-laws 8-k 001-05560 3.1 5/12/2023 4.1 specimen certificate of common stock s-3 333-92394 4 7/15/2002 4.2 description of capital stock 10-k 001-05560 4.2 11/14/2019 4.3 indenture, dated as of may 26, 2021, by and between the company and u.s. bank national association 8-k 001-05560 4.1 5/26/2021 4.4 first supplemental indenture, dated as of may 26, 2021, by and between the company and u.s. bank national association 8-k 001-05560 4.2 5/26/2021 4.5 second supplemental indenture, dated as of may 26, 2021, by and between the company and u.s. bank national association 8-k 001-05560 4.3 5/26/2021 4.6 third supplemental indenture, dated as of may 26, 2021, by and between the company and u.s. bank national association 8-k 001-05560 4.4 5/26/2021 10.1* skyworks solutions, inc. 2002 employee stock purchase plan, as amended 10-q 001-05560 10.2 7/31/2024 10.2* skyworks solutions, inc. non-qualified employee stock purchase plan, as amended 10-q 001-05560 10.3 7/31/2024 10.3* skyworks solutions, inc. amended and restated 2008 director long-term incentive plan, as amended 10-q 001-05560 10.1 5/4/2022 10.4* form of nonstatutory stock option agreement under the company s 2008 director long-term incentive plan 10-q 001-05560 10.oo 5/7/2008 10.5* form of restricted stock unit agreement under the company s 2008 director long-term incentive plan 10-q 001-05560 10.2 5/4/2016 10.6* skyworks solutions, inc. second amended and restated 2015 long-term incentive plan (incorporated by reference to annex 1 to the company s definitive proxy statement filed with the sec on march 28, 2024) def 14a 001-05560 3/28/2024 10.7* form of nonstatutory stock option agreement under the company s second amended and restated 2015 long-term incentive plan 10-k 001-05560 10.7 11/15/2024 10.8* form of performance share agreement under the company s second amended and restated 2015 long-term incentive plan 10-k 001-05560 10.8 11/15/2024 10.9* form of restricted stock unit agreement under the company s second amended and restated 2015 long-term incentive plan 10-k 001-05560 10.9 11/15/2024 10.10*&#x5e; fiscal year 2024 executive incentive plan 10-q 001-05560 10.1 1/31/2024 10.11* skyworks solutions, inc. cash compensation plan for directors 10-q 001-05560 10.1 5/1/2024 10.12* second amended and restated change in control / severance agreement, dated may 10, 2023, between the company and liam griffin 10-q 001-05560 10.1 8/8/2023 10.13* amended and restated change in control / severance agreement, dated may 10, 2023, between the company and kris sennesael x 43 10.14* amended and restated change in control / severance agreement, dated may 10, 2023, between the company and robert j. terry x 10.15* amended and restated change in control / severance agreement, dated may 10, 2023, between the company and carlos s. bori x 10.16* amended and restated change in control / severance agreement, dated may 10, 2023, between the company and kari a. durham x 10.17* amended and restated change in control / severance agreement, dated may 10, 2023, between the company and reza kasnavi x 10.18 debt commitment letter, dated as of april 22, 2021, by and between skyworks solutions, inc., and jpmorgan chase bank, n.a 8-k 001-05560 10.1 4/22/2021 10.19&#x5e; revolving credit agreement, dated as of may 21, 2021, among the company, the borrowing subsidiaries party thereto, the lenders party thereto and jpmorgan chase bank, n.a., as the administrative agent 8-k 001-05560 10.2 5/26/2021 10.20&#x5e; first amendment, dated as of march 6, 2023, among the company, the borrowing subsidiaries party thereto, the lenders party thereto and jpmorgan chase bank, n.a., as the administrative agent, amending the revolving credit agreement, dated as of may 21, 2021, by and among the company, the borrowing subsidiaries party thereto, the lenders party thereto and the administrative agent 8-k 001-05560 10.2 3/10/2023 19 skyworks solutions, inc. company policy regarding insider trading and disclosure of material non-public information x 21 subsidiaries of the company 10-k 001-05560 21 11/15/2024 23.1 consent of kpmg llp 10-k 001-05560 23.1 11/15/2024 31.1 certification of the company s chief executive officer pursuant to securities and exchange act rules 13a-14(a) and 15d-14(a), as adopted pursuant to section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002 10-k 001-05560 31.1 11/15/2024 31.2 certification of the company s chief financial officer pursuant to securities and exchange act rules 13a-14(a) and 15d-14(a), as adopted pursuant to section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002 10-k 001-05560 31.2 11/15/2024 31.3 certification of the company s chief executive officer pursuant to securities and exchange act rules 13a-14(a) and 15d-14(a), as adopted pursuant to section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002 x 31.4 certification of the company s chief financial officer pursuant to securities and exchange act rules 13a-14(a) and 15d-14(a), as adopted pursuant to section 302 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002 x 32.1 certification of the company s chief executive officer pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section 1350, as adopted pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002 10-k 001-05560 32.1 11/15/2024 32.2 certification of the company s chief financial officer pursuant to 18 u.s.c. section 1350, as adopted pursuant to section 906 of the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002 10-k 001-05560 32.2 11/15/2024 97.1 skyworks solutions, inc. executive compensation recovery policy 10-k 001-05560 97.1 11/15/2024 44 101.ins inline xbrl instance document - the instance document does not appear in the interactive data file because its xbrl tags are embedded within the inline xbrl document. 101.sch inline xbrl taxonomy extension schema document x 101.cal inline xbrl taxonomy extension calculation linkbase document x 101.def inline xbrl taxonomy extension definition linkbase document x 101.lab inline xbrl taxonomy extension label linkbase document x 101.pre inline xbrl taxonomy extension presentation linkbase document x 104 cover page interactive data file (formatted as inline xbrl with applicable taxonomy extension information contained in exhibits 101) * indicates a management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement. &#x5e; portions of this exhibit have been omitted because such information is not material and is the type of information that the registrant treats as private or confidential. 45 signatures pursuant to the requirements of section 13 or 15(d) of the securities exchange act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned thereunto duly authorized. date: january 24, 2025 skyworks solutions, inc. registrant by: /s/ liam k. griffin liam k. griffin chairman, chief executive officer and president (principal executive officer) 46