item 7. management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the information set forth in our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this annual report. the historical financial data discussed below reflects our historical results of operations and financial position and relates to periods prior to the transactions (as defined below). as a result, the following discussion does not reflect the significant impact that such events will have on us. this discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon management’s current plans, expectations and beliefs that involve risks and uncertainties. our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various known and unknown factors, including those set forth under part i, item 1a. “risk factors” and in other sections of this annual report. the following is a discussion and analysis of, and a comparison between, our results of operations for the years ended december 31, 2024 and 2023. a discussion and analysis of, and a comparison between, our results of operations for the years ended december 31, 2023 and 2022 is set forth under part ii, item 7. “management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations” in our annual report on form 10-k for the year ended december 31, 2023, filed with the sec on february 27, 2024. overview tko is a premium sports and entertainment company which operates leading combat sports and sports entertainment companies. the company monetizes its media and content properties through four principal activities: media rights and content, live events, sponsorship and consumer products licensing. tko was formed through the combination of zuffa parent, llc (n/k/a tko operating company, llc) which owns and operates the ultimate fighting championship (“ufc”), a preeminent combat sports brand and a subsidiary of endeavor group holdings, inc. (“endeavor”), a global sports and entertainment company, and world wrestling entertainment, inc. (n/k/a/ world wrestling entertainment, llc) (“wwe”), a renowned sports entertainment business. the transactions unite two complementary sports and sports entertainment properties in a single company. for additional information regarding the terms of the transactions, see note 4, acquisition of wwe, to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this annual report. in october 2024, the company entered into a definitive agreement with subsidiaries of endeavor to acquire the professional bull riders (“pbr”), on location, and img businesses (the "endeavor asset acquisition”). in addition, in april 2024, endeavor entered into a merger agreement, pursuant to which affiliates of silver lake agreed to acquire 100% of the outstanding shares of endeavor’s stock that silver lake does not already own (subject to certain exceptions) (the “endeavor take-private”). upon completion of this take-private transaction, silver lake will be our controlling stockholder through its ownership of endeavor. for a discussion of risks relating to these transactions, see part ii, item 1a. “risk factors.” segments as of december 31, 2024, we operated our business under two reportable segments, ufc and wwe. in addition, we also report results for the “corporate” group, which incurs expenses that are not allocated to the business segments. ufc the ufc segment reflects the business operations of ufc. revenue from our ufc segment principally consists of media rights fees associated with the distribution of its programming content; ticket sales and site fees associated with the business’s global live events; sponsorship; and consumer products licensing agreements of ufc-branded products. wwe the wwe segment reflects the business operations of wwe. revenue from our wwe segment principally consists of media rights fees associated with the distribution of its programming content; ticket sales and site fees associated with the business’s global live events; sponsorship; and consumer products licensing agreements of wwe-branded products. corporate corporate reflects operations not allocated to the ufc or wwe segments and primarily consists of general and administrative expenses. these expenses relate largely to corporate activities, including information technology, facilities, legal, human resources, finance, accounting, treasury, investor relations, corporate communications, community relations and compensation to tko’s management and board of directors, which support both reportable segments. corporate expenses also include service fees paid by the company to endeavor under the services agreement, inclusive of fees paid for revenue producing services related to the segments. components of our operating results revenue tko primarily generates revenue via domestic and international media rights fees, ticket sales and site fees at our live events, sponsorships, and consumer products licensing. direct operating costs tko’s direct operating costs primarily include costs associated with our athletes and talent, production, marketing, venue costs related to live events, and commissions and direct costs with distributors, as well as certain service fees paid to endeavor. selling, general and administrative tko’s selling, general and administrative expenses primarily include personnel costs as well as rent, travel, professional service costs and certain service fees paid to endeavor. provision for income taxes tko group holdings, inc. was incorporated as a delaware corporation in march 2023. as the sole managing member of tko opco, tko group holdings, inc. ultimately controls the business and affairs of ufc and wwe. tko group holdings, inc. is subject to corporate income taxes on its share of taxable income of tko opco. tko opco is treated as a partnership for u.s. federal income tax purposes and is therefore generally not subject to u.s. corporate income tax. tko opco’s foreign subsidiaries are subject to entity-level taxes. tko opco’s u.s. subsidiaries are subject to withholding taxes on sales in certain foreign jurisdictions which are included as a component of foreign current taxes. tko opco is subject to entity-level income taxes in certain u.s. state and local jurisdictions. results of operations (dollars in millions, except where noted) the following is a discussion of our consolidated results of operations for the years ended december 31, 2024 and 2023. this information is derived from our accompanying consolidated financial statements prepared in accordance with gaap. year ended december 31, 2024 2023 revenue $ 2,804.3 $ 1,675.0 operating expenses: direct operating costs 899.9 514.6 selling, general and administrative expenses 1,228.7 549.1 depreciation and amortization 392.8 164.6 total operating expenses 2,521.4 1,228.3 operating income 282.9 446.7 other expenses: interest expense, net (249.1 ) (239.0 ) other income (expense), net 0.6 (0.2 ) income before income taxes and equity losses of affiliates 34.4 207.5 provision for income taxes 25.7 31.5 income before equity losses of affiliates 8.7 176.0 equity losses of affiliates, net of tax 2.3 0.3 net income 6.4 175.7 less: net loss attributable to non-controlling interests (3.0 ) (32.5 ) less: net income attributable to tko operating company, llc prior to the transactions — 243.4 net income (loss) attributable to tko group holdings, inc. $ 9.4 $ (35.2 ) revenue revenue increased by $1,129.3 million, or 67.4%, to $2,804.3 million for the year ended december 31, 2024 compared to the year ended december 31, 2023. •ufc revenue increased by $114.0 million, or 9%. this increase was primarily driven by $55.1 million of higher sponsorship from new sponsors and increases in fees from renewals, as well as $52.5 million of greater live event revenue driven by higher attendance and higher site fee revenues primarily from ufc 302 in newark, new jersey, ufc 307 in salt lake city, utah and fight night events in riyadh, saudi arabia and abu dhabi as compared to the prior year. the current year also includes $8.8 million of increased media rights and content from higher domestic and international rights fees resulting from increases in contractual revenues despite having one fewer fight night event. these increases were partially offset by a decrease of $2.4 million in consumer products licensing revenue from lower royalties on ufc-branded products. •wwe contributed revenue of $1,398.1 million for the year ended december 31, 2024 as compared to $382.8 million for the period from september 12, 2023 through december 31, 2023 following its acquisition. this incremental revenue was driven by $616.0 million of media rights and content primarily associated with domestic and international rights fees for wwe’s flagship programs, raw, smackdown and nxt, and premium live event programming, including wrestlemania xl events, as well as $250.8 million of live event revenue which was primarily driven by hosting additional events with live ticketed audiences, including wrestlemania xl events, as well as site fees associated with certain international premium live events compared to the prior year. the additional revenue was also due to $83.5 million of consumer products licensing related to the sale of wwe-branded products and $65.0 million of sponsorship revenue from the sale of advertising. direct operating costs direct operating costs increased by $385.3 million, or 74.9%, to $899.9 million for the year ended december 31, 2024 compared to the year ended december 31, 2023. •ufc direct operating costs increased by $46.8 million, or 12%. this increase was primarily due to higher costs of $30.5 million from different athlete matchups, as well as increased production costs primarily for ufc 306, which was a marquee event at the sphere in las vegas. these increases were partially offset by lower expenses from direct costs of revenue resulting from having one less fight night event in the current year. •wwe contributed direct operating costs of $451.9 million for the year ended december 31, 2024 as compared to $127.8 million for the period from september 12, 2023 through december 31, 2023 following its acquisition. these costs were primarily driven by $280.3 million of higher talent- and production-related costs associated with wwe’s premium live events, including wrestlemania xl events, and weekly television programming, as well as higher event-related costs associated with additional live events during the current year. •corporate direct operating costs increased by $14.4 million. this increase was primarily related to service fees paid to endeavor for various operational functions that support revenue generating activities pursuant to the services agreement. the costs associated with wwe's portion of the service fees did not commence until march 2024. selling, general and administrative expenses selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $679.6 million, or 123.8%, to $1,228.7 million for the year ended december 31, 2024 compared to the year ended december 31, 2023. •ufc selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $15.5 million, or 9%. this increase was primarily due to higher cost of personnel from greater headcount driven by the opening of the ufc performance institute in mexico city in february 2024 and greater bonuses and sales commissions due to financial performance as compared to the prior year. •wwe contributed selling, general and administrative expenses of $351.6 million for the year ended december 31, 2024 as compared to $134.4 million for the period from september 12, 2023 through december 31, 2023 following its acquisition. these costs were primarily driven by $102.6 million of personnel costs driven by the timing of the acquisition, which included a $23.4 million reduction in charges associated with restructuring activities related to the transactions, as well as $57.7 million of increased travel expenses due to additional live events in the current year. the current year also includes $29.0 million of other operating expenses driven by the timing of the acquisition and impairment charges of $27.9 million as a result of reducing the carrying value of wwe assets held for sale to their fair value less cost to sell. •corporate selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $446.9 million, or 187%. this increase was primarily due to higher legal costs of $388.5 million, including the legal settlement related to the ufc antitrust lawsuit of $375.0 million. the current year also included $69.2 million of higher cost of personnel and other operating expenses, including tko executive compensation and other public company expenses following the transactions, as well as $16.2 million of costs associated with the company's debt refinancing activities. these increases were partially offset by a decrease in merger and acquisition costs of $61.2 million. the acquisition of wwe contributed $34.2 million of incremental expenses to corporate, which was primarily driven by $13.1 million of increased personnel costs, as well as $21.1 million of other operating expenses, including $12.2 million related to service fees paid to endeavor. 51 depreciation and amortization depreciation and amortization increased by $228.2 million, or 138.6%, to $392.8 million for the year ended december 31, 2024 compared to the year ended december 31, 2023. the increase was primarily due to $227.6 million of expenses associated with the acquisition of wwe. interest expense, net interest expense, net increased by $10.1 million, or 4.2%, to $249.1 million for the year ended december 31, 2024 compared to the year ended december 31, 2023. the increase was primarily due to $13.4 million of expenses associated with the acquisition of wwe as well as borrowings under our revolving credit facility. these increases were slightly offset by lower indebtedness and the refinancing of the credit facilities in november 2024 that resulted in new term loans with a lower interest rate. provision for income taxes for the year ended december 31, 2024, tko recorded a provision for income taxes of $25.7 million compared to a provision of $31.5 million for the year ended december 31, 2023. this was primarily related to the change in impact from foreign operations. net loss attributable to non-controlling interests net loss attributable to non-controlling interests was $3.0 million and $32.5 million for the years ended december 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively. the change was primarily due to the change in the amount of reported net income for the year ended december 31, 2024 as compared to the reported net income for the year ended december 31, 2023 as well as the effect of the transactions. segment results of operations as of december 31, 2024, we classified our business into two reportable segments: ufc and wwe. our chief operating decision maker evaluates the performance of our segments based on segment revenue and segment adjusted ebitda. management believes segment adjusted ebitda is indicative of operational performance and ongoing profitability, and adjusted ebitda is used to evaluate the operating performance of our segments and for planning and forecasting purposes, including the allocation of resources and capital. segment operating results reflect earnings before corporate expenses. these segment results of operations should be read in conjunction with our discussion of the company’s consolidated results of operations included above. the following tables set forth revenue and adjusted ebitda for each of our segments for the years ended december 31, 2024 and 2023: year ended december 31, 2024 2023 revenue: ufc $ 1,406.2 $ 1,292.2 wwe 1,398.1 382.8 total revenue $ 2,804.3 $ 1,675.0 year ended december 31, 2024 2023 adjusted ebitda: ufc $ 801.0 $ 755.7 wwe 681.1 163.0 corporate (230.9 ) (109.6 ) total adjusted ebitda $ 1,251.2 $ 809.1 52 ufc the following table sets forth our ufc segment results for the years ended december 31, 2024 and 2023: year ended december 31, 2024 2023 revenue media rights and content $ 879.4 $ 870.6 live events 220.4 167.9 sponsorship 251.4 196.3 consumer products licensing 55.0 57.4 total revenue $ 1,406.2 $ 1,292.2 direct operating costs $ 430.2 $ 383.4 selling, general and administrative expenses $ 175.0 $ 153.1 adjusted ebitda $ 801.0 $ 755.7 adjusted ebitda margin 57 % 58 % operating metrics number of events numbered events 14 14 fight nights 28 29 total events 42 43 location of events united states 31 33 international 11 10 total events 42 43 wwe the following table sets forth our wwe segment results for the year ended december 31, 2024 and for the post-acquisition period from september 12, 2023 through december 31, 2023: year ended december 31, 2024 2023 revenue media rights and content $ 865.5 $ 249.5 live events 338.5 87.7 sponsorship 83.0 18.0 consumer products licensing 111.1 27.6 total revenue $ 1,398.1 $ 382.8 direct operating costs $ 426.9 $ 125.7 selling, general and administrative expenses $ 290.1 $ 94.1 adjusted ebitda $ 681.1 $ 163.0 adjusted ebitda margin 49 % 43 % operating metrics number of events premium live events 13 3 televised events 98 27 non-televised events 65 46 total events 176 76 location of events united states 132 66 international 44 10 total events 176 76 53 corporate corporate expenses relate largely to corporate activities, including information technology, facilities, legal, human resources, finance, accounting, treasury, investor relations, corporate communications, community relations and compensation to tko’s management and board of directors, which support both reportable segments. corporate expenses also include service fees paid by the company to endeavor related to corporate activities as well as revenue generating activities under the services agreement. the following table displays results for corporate for the years ended december 31, 2024 and 2023: year ended december 31, 2024 2023 adjusted ebitda $ (230.9 ) $ (109.6 ) adjusted ebitda decreased by $121.3 million, or 111%, for the year ended december 31, 2024 compared to the year ended december 31, 2023. the acquisition of wwe contributed incremental corporate expenses of $50.7 million, primarily driven by the cost of personnel and other general and administrative expenses. the remaining decrease was attributable to $44.9 million resulting from increases in cost of personnel, including tko executive compensation, and other public company expenses following the transactions, as well as $25.7 million of higher service fees paid to endeavor. the costs associated with wwe's portion of the service fees did not commence until march 2024. non-gaap financial measures adjusted ebitda is a non-gaap financial measure and is defined as net income, excluding income taxes, net interest expense, depreciation and amortization, equity-based compensation, merger and acquisition costs, certain legal costs, restructuring, severance and impairment charges, and certain other items when applicable. adjusted ebitda margin is a non-gaap financial measure defined as adjusted ebitda divided by revenue. tko management believes that adjusted ebitda and adjusted ebitda margin are useful to investors as the measures eliminate the significant level of non-cash depreciation and amortization expense that results from its capital investments and intangible assets, and improve comparability by eliminating the significant level of interest expense associated with tko’s debt facilities, as well as income taxes which may not be comparable with other companies based on tko’s tax and corporate structure. adjusted ebitda and adjusted ebitda margin are used as the primary bases to evaluate tko’s consolidated operating performance. adjusted ebitda and adjusted ebitda margin have limitations as analytical tools, and you should not consider them in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of tko’s results as reported under gaap. some of these limitations are: •they do not reflect every cash expenditure, future requirements for capital expenditures, or contractual commitments; •adjusted ebitda does not reflect the significant interest expense or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments on tko’s debt; •although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced or require improvements in the future, and adjusted ebitda and adjusted ebitda margin do not reflect any cash requirement for such replacements or improvements; and •they are not adjusted for all non-cash income or expense items that are reflected in tko’s statements of cash flows. tko management compensates for these limitations by using adjusted ebitda and adjusted ebitda margin along with other comparative tools, together with gaap measurements, to assist in the evaluation of tko’s operating performance. adjusted ebitda and adjusted ebitda margin should not be considered substitutes for the reported results prepared in accordance with gaap and should not be considered in isolation or as alternatives to net income as indicators of tko’s financial performance, as measures of discretionary cash available to it to invest in the growth of its business or as measures of cash that will be available to tko to meet its obligations. although tko uses adjusted ebitda and adjusted ebitda margin as financial measures to assess the performance of its business, such use is limited because it does not include certain material costs necessary to operate tko’s business. tko’s presentation of adjusted ebitda and adjusted ebitda margin should not be construed as indications that its future results will be unaffected by unusual or nonrecurring items. these non-gaap financial measures, as determined and presented by tko, may not be comparable to related or similarly titled measures reported by other companies. set forth below are reconciliations of tko’s most directly comparable financial measures calculated in accordance with gaap to these non-gaap financial measures on a consolidated basis. 54 adjusted ebitda and adjusted ebitda margin year ended december 31, 2024 2023 reconciliation of net income to adjusted ebitda net income $ 6.4 $ 175.7 provision for income taxes 25.7 31.5 interest expense, net 249.1 239.0 depreciation and amortization 392.8 164.6 equity-based compensation expense (1) 94.6 57.1 merger and acquisition costs (2) 21.2 83.8 certain legal costs (3) 401.1 34.2 restructuring, severance and impairment (4) 41.9 21.5 debt transaction costs (5) 16.2 — other adjustments 2.2 1.7 total adjusted ebitda $ 1,251.2 $ 809.1 net income margin 0 % 10 % adjusted ebitda margin 45 % 48 % (1)equity-based compensation represents non-cash compensation expense for awards issued under endeavor’s 2021 plan subsequent to its april 28, 2021 ipo, for the replacement awards and for awards issued under the 2023 incentive award plan. for the year ended december 31, 2024, equity-based compensation includes $17.7 million of expense associated with certain services provided by an independent contractor in the wwe segment. for the year ended december 31, 2024 and 2023, equity-based compensation includes $3.3 million and $19.9 million, respectively, of expense associated with accelerated vesting of the replacement awards related to the workforce reduction of certain employees in the wwe segment and corporate. (2)includes (i) certain costs of professional fees and bonuses related to the transactions and payable contingent on the closing of the transactions primarily incurred during the year ended december 31, 2023 and (ii) certain costs of professional advisors related to other strategic transactions, primarily the endeavor asset acquisition, incurred during the year ended december 31, 2024. (3)includes costs related to certain litigation matters including antitrust lawsuits for ufc and wwe and matters where mr. mcmahon has agreed to make future payments to certain counterparties personally. for the year ended december 31, 2024, these costs include settlement charges of $375.0 million regarding the ufc antitrust lawsuit, as described in note 21, commitments and contingencies, to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this annual report. for the year ended december 31, 2023, these costs included the settlement of a wwe antitrust matter for $20.0 million. (4)includes costs resulting from the company’s cost reduction program during the years ended december 31, 2024 and 2023, as described in note 17, restructuring charges, to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this annual report. additionally, during the year ended december 31, 2024, the company recorded impairment charges of $27.9 million as a result of reducing the carrying value of wwe assets held for sale to their fair value less cost to sell, as described in note 5, supplementary data, to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this annual report. (5)for the year ended december 31, 2024, the company incurred certain costs associated with the credit agreement amendment, as described in note 8, debt, to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this annual report. liquidity and capital resources sources and uses of cash cash flows from operations are used to fund tko’s day-to-day operations, revenue-generating activities, and routine capital expenditures, as well as service its long-term debt, and are expected to be used to fund our capital return program. credit facilities as of december 31, 2024 and 2023, the company had $2.8 billion and $2.7 billion, respectively, outstanding under a credit agreement dated august 18, 2016 (as amended and/or restated, the “first lien credit agreement”), by and among zuffa guarantor, llc (“zuffa guarantor”), ufc holdings, llc (“ufc holdings”), as borrower, the lenders party hereto and goldman sachs bank usa, as administrative agent, which was entered into in connection with the acquisition of zuffa by egh in 2016. tko operating company, llc and tko group holdings, inc. are holding companies with limited business operations, cash flows, assets and liabilities other than the equity interests in the borrower entities zuffa guarantor and ufc holdings. on november 21, 2024 (the “closing date”), ufc holdings entered into the fifth refinancing amendment (the “credit agreement amendment”) to the first lien credit agreement (as previously amended and/or restated, the “existing credit agreement” and, as further amended by the credit agreement amendment, the “credit agreement”). 55 the credit agreement amendment amended the existing credit agreement to, among other things, (i) refinance and replace the outstanding first lien secured term loans (the “existing term loans”) with a new class of first lien secured term loans in an aggregate principal amount of $2,750.0 million (the “new term loans”), which now mature on november 21, 2031, (ii) refinance the existing secured revolving credit facility (the “existing revolving credit facility”) in an aggregate principal amount of $205.0 million, which now matures on november 21, 2029 (the “new revolving credit facility,” and, together with the new term loans, the “credit facilities”), and (iii) make certain other changes to the existing credit agreement including as summarized below. the credit facilities are secured by liens on substantially all of the assets of zuffa guarantor and ufc holdings and certain subsidiaries thereof. the new term loans accrue interest at an annual interest rate equal to term secured overnight financing rate ("sofr") plus 2.25%, with a sofr floor of 0.00%, which totaled 6.77% as of december 31, 2024. the existing term loans accrued interest at an annual interest rate equal to sofr plus a credit spread adjustment plus 2.75%. the new term loans include 1% principal amortization payable in equal quarterly installments, with any remaining balance payable on the final maturity date of november 21, 2031. the loans made pursuant to the new revolving credit facility accrue interest at a variable interest rate equal to term sofr plus 2.00%-2.25%, depending on the first lien leverage ratio (as defined in the credit agreement), with a sofr floor of 0.00% on the closing date, ufc holdings borrowed $2,750.0 million of new term loans under the credit agreement to (i) repay the entire amount outstanding under the existing term loans and (ii) pay fees and expenses incurred in connection with entering into the credit agreement amendment. in april 2024, ufc holdings borrowed $150.0 million under its existing revolving credit facility to fund certain share repurchases that occurred during the second quarter of 2024, as discussed in note 10, stockholders’ equity. in june 2024, ufc holdings fully repaid the $150.0 million outstanding. as of december 31, 2024 and 2023, there was no outstanding balance under the new revolving credit facility. the new revolving credit facility contains a financial covenant that requires the company to maintain, commencing with the fiscal quarter ending june 30, 2025, a first lien leverage ratio of consolidated first lien debt to consolidated ebitda of 8.25-to-1. prior to the closing date, zuffa guarantor was required to maintain a first lien leverage ratio of no more than 6.5-to-1. pursuant to the terms of the credit agreement amendment, following the closing date, the company is only required to comply with the foregoing financial covenant if the sum of outstanding borrowings under the new revolving credit facility (excluding any letters of credit, whether drawn or undrawn) is greater than the greater of (i) $85.0 million and (ii) forty percent of the borrowing capacity of the new revolving credit facility. prior to the closing date, this applicable testing condition was thirty-five percent of the borrowing capacity of the existing revolving credit facility. this covenant did not apply as of december 31, 2024 and 2023 as ufc holdings had no borrowings outstanding under either of the revolving credit facilities. ufc holdings had no outstanding letters of credit as of december 31, 2024 and 2023. restrictions on dividends the credit agreement contains restrictions on tko’s ability to make distributions and other payments from the respective credit groups. these restrictions on dividends include exceptions for, among other things, (1) amounts necessary to make tax payments, (2) a limited annual amount for employee equity repurchases, (3) distributions required to fund certain parent entities, (4) other specific allowable situations and (5) a general restricted payment basket, which generally provides for no restrictions as long as the total leverage ratio (as defined in the credit agreement) is less than 5.0x. other debt in october 2018, ufc entered into a $28.0 million loan agreement and a $12.0 million loan agreement in order to finance the purchase of a building and its adjacent land (the “secured commercial loans”). the secured commercial loans have identical terms except the $28.0 million loan agreement is secured by a deed of trust for ufc’s headquarters building and underlying land in las vegas and the $12.0 million loan agreement is secured by a deed of trust for the acquired building and its adjacent land, also located in las vegas. the secured commercial loans bear interest at a rate of libor plus 1.62% (with a libor floor of 0.88%). in may 2023, the parties amended the terms of the secured commercial loans to replace the adjusted libor reference rate with sofr, and bear interest at a rate of sofr plus 1.70%. principal amortization of 4% is payable in monthly installments with any remaining balance payable on the final maturity date of november 1, 2028. the applicable loan agreements each contain a financial covenant that requires ufc to maintain a debt service coverage ratio as defined in the applicable loan agreements of no less than 1.15-to-1 as measured on an annual basis (the “secured commercial loan covenant”). as of december 31, 2024 and 2023, ufc was in compliance with the secured commercial loan covenant. 56 capital return programs on october 24, 2024, we announced that the board had authorized a share repurchase program of up to $2.0 billion of its class a common stock and the approval of a quarterly cash dividend pursuant to which holders of our class a common stock will receive their pro rata share of approximately $75 million in quarterly distributions to be made by tko opco. we will determine at our discretion the timing and the amount of any repurchases based on our evaluation of market conditions, share price, and other factors. repurchases under the share repurchase program may be made in the open market, in privately negotiated transactions or otherwise, and we are not obligated to acquire any particular amount under the share repurchase program. the share repurchase program has no expiration, is expected to be completed within approximately three to four years and may be modified, suspended, or discontinued at any time. in february 2025, we announced that our inaugural quarterly cash dividend will be paid on march 31, 2025. future declarations of quarterly dividends are subject to our determination and discretion of based on our consideration of various factors, such as our results of operations, financial condition, market conditions, earnings, cash flow requirements, restrictions in our debt agreements and legal requirements and other factors that we deem relevant. cash flows overview year ended december 31, (in millions) 2024 2023 net cash provided by operating activities $ 583.4 $ 468.4 net cash (used in) provided by investing activities $ (59.0 ) $ 12.3 net cash used in financing activities $ (232.3 ) $ (424.5 ) operating activities increased from $468.4 million of cash provided in the year ended december 31, 2023 to $583.4 million of cash provided in the year ended december 31, 2024. cash provided in the year ended december 31, 2024 was higher than the year ended december 31, 2023 primarily due to an increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $182.7 million driven by the settlement agreement in the ufc antitrust lawsuit and the timing of bonus payments, partially offset by a decrease in net income for the period of $169.3 million, which included an increase in certain non-cash items, including depreciation and amortization of $228.2 million, equity-based compensation of $37.5 million and impairment charges of $27.9 million. investing activities decreased from $12.3 million of cash provided in the year ended december 31, 2023 to $59.0 million of cash used in the year ended december 31, 2024. cash used in the year ended december 31, 2024 primarily reflects payments of $74.9 million for property, buildings and equipment and investments in affiliates of $23.5 million. these payments were partially offset by proceeds of $28.4 million primarily related to the sale of wwe's owned properties in stamford, connecticut, as well as infrastructure improvement incentives received of $11.0 million. cash provided in the year ended december 31, 2023 primarily reflects $381.2 million of cash acquired from wwe as part of the transactions partially offset by the payment of $321.0 million of deferred compensation in the form of a dividend to former wwe shareholders. during the year ended december 31, 2023, the company also made purchases of $48.6 million related to payments for property, buildings and equipment. financing activities increased from $424.5 million of cash used in the year ended december 31, 2023 to $232.3 million of cash used in the year ended december 31, 2024. cash used in the year ended december 31, 2024 primarily reflects share repurchases of $165.0 million, distributions to endeavor and subsidiaries of $67.3 million. cash used in the year ended december 31, 2023 primarily reflects net distributions to endeavor and subsidiaries of $296.6 million, share repurchases of $100.0 million and net payments on debt of $33.4 million. future sources and uses of liquidity tko’s sources of liquidity are (1) cash on hand, (2) cash flows from operations and (3) available borrowings under the credit facilities (which borrowings would be subject to certain restrictive covenants contained therein). based on its current expectations, tko believes that these sources of liquidity will be sufficient to fund its working capital requirements and to meet its commitments, including long-term debt service, for at least the next 12 months. tko expects that its primary liquidity needs will be cash to (1) provide capital to facilitate organic growth of its business, (2) pay operating expenses, including cash compensation to its employees, athletes and talent, (3) fund capital expenditures and investments, (4) pay interest and principal when due on the credit facilities, (5) pay income taxes, (6) reduce its outstanding indebtedness under the credit facilities, (7) fund the legal settlements described in note 21, commitments and contingencies, to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this annual report, (8) fund share repurchases as authorized by the board and (9) make distributions to members and, in accordance with the company's cash management policy, to tko stockholders, including the planned quarterly dividend when declared by the board. 57 contractual obligations, commitments and contingencies the following table represents our contractual obligations as of december 31, 2024, aggregated by type: after (in millions) 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2029 total long-term debt, principal payments (1) $ 29.1 $ 29.1 $ 29.1 $ 53.0 $ 27.5 $ 2,613 $ 2,780.3 long-term debt, interest payments (2) 190.6 188.6 186.6 185.0 181.4 336.1 $ 1,268.3 operating leases (3) 6.7 6.7 6.2 4.7 3.9 14.9 $ 43.2 finance leases (3) (4) 30.4 32.4 24.3 18.2 18.2 447.7 $ 571.2 service contracts and commitments (5) 186.3 125.3 101.3 98.5 93.0 75.6 $ 680.0 total commitments $ 443.1 $ 382.1 $ 347.5 $ 359.4 $ 324.0 $ 3,486.8 $ 5,342.9 (1)the principal balance of certain debt is repaid on a quarterly basis, with the balance due at maturity. see note 8, debt, to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report for further detail. (2)variable interest rate payments on our long-term debt are calculated based on the current interest rate as of december 31, 2024 and the scheduled maturity of the underlying loans. (3)our operating and finance leases are primarily for office facilities and equipment. certain of these leases contain provisions for rent escalations or lease concessions. the obligations disclosed in the table above are presented on an undiscounted basis. see note 20, leases, to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report for further detail. (4)our finance lease payments include $334.4 million related to options to extend wwe’s global headquarters lease that are reasonably certain of being exercised. (5)see note 21, commitments and contingencies, to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report for further detail. critical accounting estimates the preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make assumptions, estimates or judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. we base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. these assumptions, estimates or judgments, however, are both subjective and subject to change, and actual results may differ from our assumptions and estimates. we believe the following estimates related to certain of our critical accounting policies could potentially produce materially different results if we were to change underlying assumptions, estimates or judgments. see note 2, summary of significant accounting policies, to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this annual report for a summary of our significant accounting policies. revenue recognition we have revenue recognition policies for our various operating segments that are appropriate to the circumstances of each business. in accordance with asc 606, revenue from contracts with customers (“asc 606”), revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to the company’s customers either at a point in time or over time, in an amount that reflects the consideration the company expects to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. asc 606 requires additional disclosures about the nature, amount, timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from customer contracts, including significant judgments and estimates, and changes in those estimates. arrangements with multiple performance obligations we have various types of contracts with multiple performance obligations, primarily consisting of multi-year media rights, site fees, consumer products licensing and sponsorship agreements. the transaction price in these types of contracts is allocated on a relative stand-alone selling price basis. we typically determine the stand-alone selling price of individual performance obligations based on management estimates, unless stand-alone selling prices are observable through past transactions. estimates used to determine a performance obligation’s stand-alone selling price impact the amount and timing of revenue recognized, but not the total amount of revenue to be recognized under the arrangement. principal versus agent we enter into many arrangements that require management to determine whether we are acting as a principal or an agent. this determination involves judgment and requires evaluation as to whether the company controls the goods or services before they are transferred to the customer. as part of this analysis, the company considers whether we are primarily responsible for fulfillment of the promise to provide the specified service, have inventory risk and have discretion in establishing prices. for events, this determination is primarily based on whether we own and control the event. for media rights distribution, this determination is primarily based on whether 58 we have control over the media rights including inventory risk and setting pricing with customers. for re-billable expenses related to advertising and brand activation services, this determination is primarily based on whether we are responsible for fulfillment of the services to the customer. if our determinations were to change, the amounts of our revenue and operating expenses may be different. timing of recognition media rights and content broadcast and streaming rights fees received from distributors of our live event and television programming, both domestic and internationally, are recorded when the live event or program has been delivered and is available for distribution. certain of our media rights are typically sold in multi-year arrangements and are generally comprised of multiple performance obligations that involve the allocation of transaction price based on the relative stand-alone selling price of each performance obligation. tko uses its estimate of stand-alone selling price to allocate transaction price. any advance payments received from distributors are deferred upon collection and recognized into revenue as content is delivered. we recognize revenue from ppv programming from live sporting events when the event is aired. ppv programming is distributed through cable, satellite and digital providers. ufc and wwe receive a fixed license fee for its domestic residential ppv programming under long-term contracts. for ufc and wwe’s international and commercial ppv, the amount of revenue recognized is based upon management’s initial estimate of variable consideration related to the number of buys achieved. this initial estimate is based on preliminary buy information received from certain ppv distributors and is subject to adjustment as new information regarding the number of buys is received, which is generally up to 120 days subsequent to the live event. if our estimates of buys achieved were to change, the timing and amount of its revenue may be different. ufc owns and operates its own over-the-top (“ott”) platform ufc fight pass that engages customers through a subscription based model. subscriptions are offered to customers for one-month, six-month and 12-month access to ufc fight pass. wwe distributes content through its platform wwe network, which collects licensing fees from distribution partners and collects monthly subscription fees. subscription revenue for ufc fight pass and wwe network is recognized ratably over each paid monthly membership period and revenue is deferred for subscriptions paid in advance until earned. live events live event revenue is generally recognized at the time that an event occurs. advance ticket sales, site fees and sales of vip package are recorded as deferred revenue pending the event date. sponsorship customer contracts for advertising and sponsorship rights are generally comprised of multiple performance obligations that involve the allocation of the arrangement consideration to the underlying deliverables based upon their stand-alone selling price. we use an adjusted market assessment approach as our estimate of stand-alone selling price to allocate arrangement consideration as the performance obligations under customer contracts are infrequently sold on a stand-alone basis. after allocating revenue to each performance obligation, we recognize sponsorship revenue when the promotional service is delivered. if our estimates of stand-alone selling prices were to change, the timing and amount of our revenue may be different. consumer products licensing consumer products licensing revenue relates to royalties earned from sales of licensed merchandise and digital products. the nature of the licensing arrangements is typically symbolic intellectual property, inclusive of logos, trade names, and trademarks related to merchandise sales. many licensing agreements include minimum guarantees, which set forth the minimum royalty to be paid during a given contract year. we will recognize the minimum guarantee revenue ratably over its related royalties’ contract period until such point that it is more likely than not that the total revenue during the royalty period will exceed the minimum royalty. if during the royalty period, management determines that total revenue will exceed the minimum royalty, the revenue recognized during each reporting period will reflect royalties earned on the underlying product sales. for licensing agreements without minimum guarantees, we recognize revenue related to the sales or usage of the underlying symbolic intellectual property over time as the sales or usage occurs. the amount of revenue recognized is based on either statements received or management’s best estimate of sales or usage in a period, if statements are received on a lag. if our estimates and judgments were to change, the timing and amount of revenue recognized may be different. 59 goodwill goodwill is tested annually as of october 1 for impairment and at any time upon the occurrence of certain events or substantive changes in circumstances that indicate the carrying amount of goodwill may not be recoverable. we perform our goodwill impairment test at the reporting unit level, which is one level below the operating segment level. we have two operating and reportable segments, consistent with the way management makes decisions and allocates resources to the business. we have the option to perform a qualitative assessment to determine if an impairment is more likely than not to have occurred. a qualitative assessment includes, but is not limited to, consideration of the results of our most recent quantitative impairment test, consideration of macroeconomic conditions, and industry and market conditions. if we can support the conclusion that it is “not more likely than not” that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount under the qualitative assessment, we would not need to perform the quantitative impairment test for that reporting unit. if we cannot support such a conclusion or we do not elect to perform the qualitative assessment then we must perform the quantitative impairment test. the first step of the goodwill impairment test is used to identify potential impairment by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount, including goodwill. to determine the fair value of our reporting units, we generally use a present value technique (discounted cash flows) corroborated by market multiples when available and as appropriate. we apply what we believe to be the most appropriate valuation methodology for each of our reporting units. we believe our estimates of fair value are consistent with how a marketplace participant would value our reporting units. the discounted cash flow analyses are sensitive to our estimates of future revenue growth and margins for these businesses along with discount rates. our long-term cash flow projections are estimates and inherently subject to uncertainty, particularly during periods of adverse economic conditions. significant estimates and assumptions specific to each reporting unit may include revenue growth, profit margins, terminal value growth rates, discount rates and other assumptions deemed reasonable by management. where a market approach is utilized, we use judgment in identifying the relevant comparable-company market multiples. these estimates and assumptions may vary between each reporting unit depending on the facts and circumstances specific to that unit. if we had established different reporting units or utilized different valuation methodologies or assumptions, the impairment test results could differ. if the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, such excess is recognized as an impairment. for the year ended december 31, 2024, we performed a qualitative impairment test which resulted in no impairment charges. intangible assets for finite-lived intangible assets that are amortized, we evaluate assets for recoverability when there is an indication of potential impairment or when the useful lives are no longer appropriate. if the estimated undiscounted future cash flows from a group of assets being evaluated is less than the carrying value of that group of assets, an impairment would be measured as the difference between the fair value of the group’s long-lived assets and the carrying value of the group’s long-lived assets. we define an asset group by identifying the lowest level of cash flows generated by a group of assets that are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets. if identified, the impairment is allocated to the long-lived assets of the group on a pro rata basis using the relative carrying amounts, but only to the extent the carrying value of each asset is above its fair value. determining whether a long-lived asset is impaired requires various estimates and assumptions, including whether a triggering event has occurred, the identification of the asset groups, estimates of future cash flows and the discount rate used to determine fair values. if we had established different asset groups or utilized different valuation methodologies or assumptions, the impairment test results could differ, and we could be required to record impairment charges. equity-based compensation we grant equity awards to certain executives, employees and service providers, which may be in the form of various equity-based awards such as restricted stock, restricted stock units and stock options. we record compensation costs related to our equity awards issued to executives and other employees based on the grant date fair value of the award. compensation cost for time-based awards is recognized ratably over the applicable vesting period and compensation cost for awards with a performance condition is reassessed each period and recognized based upon the probability that the performance conditions will be achieved. the awards with a performance condition are expensed when the achievement of performance conditions is probable. compensation cost for performance-based awards with a market condition is recognized regardless of the number of units that vest based on the market condition and is recognized on straight-line basis over the estimated service period, with each tranche separately measured. compensation expense is not reversed even if the market condition is not satisfied. 60 replacement awards pursuant to the transaction agreement, the company converted each wwe equity award of restricted stock units (“rsus”) and performance stock units (“psus”) held by wwe directors, officers and employees into tko rsus and psus of equal value and vesting conditions (with such performance-vesting conditions equitably adjusted), respectively (the “replacement awards”). the value of the replacement awards was determined using the closing price of wwe class a common stock, par value $0.01 per share (“wwe class a common stock”), on the day immediately preceding the closing of the transactions. the portion of the replacement awards issued in connection with the transactions that was associated with services rendered prior to the date of the transactions was included in the total consideration transferred. with regards to the remaining unvested portion of the replacement awards, equity-based compensation costs of rsus are recognized over the total remaining service period on a straight-line basis with forfeitures recognized as they occur. rsus have a service requirement and generally vest in equal annual installments over a three-year period. unvested rsus accrue dividend equivalents at the same rate as are paid on shares of class a common stock. the dividend equivalents are subject to the same vesting schedule as the underlying rsus. psus, which are subject to certain performance conditions and have a service requirement, generally vest in equal installments over a three-year period. until such time as the performance conditions are met, stock compensation costs associated with these psus are re-measured each reporting period based upon the fair market value of the company’s common stock and the estimated performance attainment on the reporting date. the ultimate number of psus that are issued to an employee is the result of the actual performance of the company at the end of the performance period compared to the performance conditions. compensation costs for psus are recognized using a graded-vesting attribution method over the vesting period based upon the probability that the performance conditions will be achieved, with forfeitures recognized as they occur. unvested psus accrue dividend equivalents once the performance conditions are met at the same rate as are paid on shares of class a common stock. the dividend equivalents are subject to the same vesting schedule as the underlying psus. income taxes tko group holdings, inc. was incorporated as a delaware corporation in march 2023. as the sole managing member of tko opco, tko group holdings, inc. ultimately controls all business and affairs of ufc and wwe. tko group holdings, inc. is subject to corporate income taxes on its share of taxable income of tko opco. tko opco is treated as a partnership for u.s. federal income tax purposes and is therefore generally not subject to u.s. corporate income tax, other than entity-level income taxes in certain u.s. state and local jurisdictions. tko opco’s foreign subsidiaries are subject to entity-level taxes, and tko opco’s u.s. subsidiaries are subject to foreign withholding taxes on sales in certain foreign jurisdictions which are included as a component of foreign current taxes. deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. the effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. significant factors considered by us in estimating the probability of the realization of deferred tax assets include expectations of future earnings and taxable income, as well as application of tax laws in the jurisdictions in which we operate. a valuation allowance is provided when we determine that it is “more likely than not” that a portion of a deferred tax asset will not be realized. our deferred tax positions may change if our estimates regarding future realization of deferred tax assets were to change. a minimum probability threshold for a tax position must be met before a financial statement benefit is recognized. the tax benefit to be recognized is measured as the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. the tax benefits ultimately realized by us may differ from those recognized in our financial statements based on a number of factors, including our decision to settle rather than litigate a matter, relevant legal precedent related to similar matters and our success in supporting its filing positions with taxing authorities. we recognize interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits on the income tax expense line in the consolidated statements of operations. accrued interest and penalties are included in the related tax liability line in the consolidated balance sheet. consolidation we typically consolidate entities in which we own more than 50% of the voting common stock and control operations, as well as variable interest entities (“vie”) for which we are deemed the primary beneficiary. evaluating whether an entity in which we have a variable interest is a vie and whether we are the primary beneficiary may require management to make significant judgments involving evaluating the fair value and capitalization of the investee along with the most significant activities of the entity and the party that has power over those activities. 61 business combinations we account for our business combinations under the acquisition method of accounting. identifiable assets acquired, liabilities assumed and any non-controlling interest in the acquiree are recognized and measured as of the acquisition date at fair value. additionally, contingent consideration is recorded at fair value on the acquisition date and classified as a liability. goodwill is recognized to the extent by which the aggregate of the acquisition-date fair value of the consideration transferred and any non-controlling interest in the acquiree exceeds the recognized basis of the identifiable assets acquired, net of assumed liabilities. determining the fair value of assets acquired, liabilities assumed and non-controlling interest requires management’s judgment and often involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including assumptions with respect to future cash flows, discount rates and asset lives, among other items. during the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments, in the period in which they are determined, to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed with the corresponding offset to goodwill. upon the conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the values of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recognized in the consolidated statements of operations. non-controlling interests non-controlling interests in consolidated subsidiaries represent the component of common equity in consolidated subsidiaries held by third parties. non-controlling interests with redemption features, such as put options, that are redeemable outside of our control are considered redeemable non-controlling interests and are classified as temporary equity on the consolidated balance sheet. redeemable non-controlling interests are recorded at the greater of carrying value, which is adjusted for the non-controlling interests’ share of net income or loss, or estimated redemption value at each reporting period. estimating the fair value or other redemption value requires management to make estimates and assumptions specific to each non-controlling interest including revenue growth, profit margins, terminal value growth rates, discount rates under the income approach and other assumptions such as market multiples for comparable companies. these estimates and assumptions may vary between each redeemable non-controlling interest depending on the facts and circumstances specific to that consolidated subsidiary. recent accounting pronouncements see note 3, recent accounting pronouncements, to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this annual report for further information on certain accounting standards that have been recently adopted or that have not yet been required to be implemented and may be applicable to our future operations.