em 7. management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the information set forth in our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this annual report. the historical financial data discussed below reflects our historical results of operations and financial position and relates to periods prior to the transactions (as defined below). as a result, the following discussion does not reflect the significant impact that such events will have on us. this discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon management’s current plans, expectations and beliefs that involve risks and uncertainties. our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various known and unknown factors, including those set forth under part i, item 1a. “risk factors” and in other sections of this annual report. the following is a discussion and analysis of, and a comparison between, our results of operations for the years ended december 31, 2023 and 2022. a discussion and analysis of, and a comparison between, our results of operations for the years ended december 31, 2022 and 2021 can be found in the section entitled, “management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations” in our final prospectus on form 424(b)(3) filed with the sec on may 14, 2023. overview tko is a premium sports and entertainment company which operates leading combat sports and sports entertainment brands. the company monetizes its media and content properties through four principal activities: media rights and content, live events, sponsorship and consumer products licensing. tko was formed through the combination of zuffa parent, llc (n/k/a tko operating company, llc) which owns and operates the ultimate fighting championship (“ufc”), a preeminent combat sports brand and a subsidiary of endeavor group holdings, inc. (“endeavor”), a global sports and entertainment company, and world wrestling entertainment, inc. (n/k/a/ world wrestling entertainment, llc) (“wwe”), a renowned sports entertainment business. the transactions unite two complementary sports and sports entertainment brands in a single company supported by endeavor’s capabilities in premium ip ownership, talent representation, live events and experiences. for additional information regarding the terms of the transactions, see note 4, acquisition of wwe, to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this annual report. segments as of december 31, 2023, we operated our business under two reportable segments, ufc and wwe. in addition, we also report results for the “corporate” group, which incurs expenses that are not allocated to the business segments. ufc the ufc segment reflects the business operations of ufc. revenue from our ufc segment principally consists of media rights fees associated with the distribution of its programming content; ticket sales and site fees associated with the business’s global live events; sponsorships; and consumer product licensing agreements of ufc-branded products. wwe the wwe segment reflects the business operations of wwe. revenue from our wwe segment principally consists of media rights fees associated with the distribution of its programming content; ticket sales and site fees associated with the business’s global live events; sponsorships; and consumer product licensing agreements of wwe-branded products. corporate corporate reflects operations not allocated to the ufc or wwe segments and primarily consists of general and administrative expenses. these expenses relate largely to corporate activities, including information technology, facilities, legal, human resources, finance, accounting, treasury, investor relations, corporate communications, community relations and compensation to tko’s management and board of directors, which support both reportable segments. corporate expenses also include service fees paid by the company to endeavor under the services agreement, inclusive of fees paid for revenue producing services related to the segments. components of our operating results revenue tko primarily generates revenue via domestic and international media rights fees, ticket sales and site fees at our live events, sponsorships, and consumer products licensing. 44 direct operating costs tko’s direct operating costs primarily include costs associated with our athletes and talent, production, marketing, venue costs related to live events, and commissions and direct costs with distributors, as well as certain service fees paid to endeavor. selling, general and administrative tko’s selling, general and administrative expenses primarily include personnel costs as well as rent, travel, professional service costs and certain service fees paid to endeavor. provision for income taxes tko group holdings, inc. was incorporated as a delaware corporation in march 2023. as the sole managing member of tko opco, tko group holdings, inc. operates and controls all the business and affairs of ufc and wwe. tko group holdings, inc. is subject to corporate income taxes on its share of taxable income of tko opco. tko opco is treated as a partnership for u.s. federal income tax purposes and is therefore generally not subject to u.s. corporate income tax. tko opco’s foreign subsidiaries are subject to entity-level taxes. tko opco’s u.s. subsidiaries are subject to withholding taxes on sales in certain foreign jurisdictions which are included as a component of foreign current taxes. tko opco is subject to entity-level income taxes in certain u.s. state and local jurisdictions. results of operations (dollars in millions, except where noted) the following is a discussion of our consolidated results of operations for the years ended december 31, 2023 and 2022. this information is derived from our accompanying consolidated financial statements prepared in accordance with gaap. year ended december 31, 2023 2022 revenue $ 1,675.0 $ 1,140.1 operating expenses: direct operating costs 514.6 325.6 selling, general and administrative expenses 549.1 210.1 depreciation and amortization 164.6 60.0 total operating expenses 1,228.3 595.7 operating income 446.7 544.4 other expenses: interest expense, net (239.0) (139.6) other expense, net (0.2) (1.3) income before income taxes and equity losses of affiliates 207.5 403.5 provision for income taxes 31.5 14.3 income before equity losses of affiliates 176.0 389.2 equity losses of affiliates, net of tax 0.3 0.2 net income 175.7 389.0 less: net (loss) income attributable to non-controlling interests (32.5) 1.7 less: net income attributable to tko operating company, llc prior to the transactions 243.4 387.3 net loss attributable to tko group holdings, inc. $ (35.2) $ — revenue revenue increased by $534.9 million, or 47%, to $1,675.0 million for the year ended december 31, 2023 compared to the year ended december 31, 2022. ufc revenue increased by $152.1 million, or 13%. this increase was primarily driven by $76.2 million of increased media rights and content from higher domestic and international rights fees resulting from increases in contractual revenues, higher fees associated with international renewals and one additional ppv event compared to the prior year period. additionally, the increase in revenue was due to $42.6 million of greater live event revenue from having 26 events with live audiences compared to 21 events in the prior year and higher site fees, $29.5 million of higher sponsorship from new sponsors and increases in fees from renewals and $3.8 million of increased consumer products licensing revenue from greater video game royalties. wwe contributed revenue of $382.8 million for the period from september 12, 2023 through december 31, 2023 following its acquisition. this revenue was driven by $249.5 million of media rights and content primarily associated with domestic and international rights fees for wwe’s flagship programs, raw, smackdown and nxt, as well as $87.7 million 45 of live event revenue which was primarily driven by site fees associated with the crown jewel premium live event in saudi arabia as well as hosting 75 other events with live ticketed audiences. additionally, this revenue was driven by $27.6 million of consumer products licensing related to the sale of wwe-branded products and $18.0 million of sponsorship revenue from the sale of advertising. direct operating costs direct operating costs increased by $189.0 million or 58% to $514.6 million for the year ended december 31, 2023 compared to the year ended december 31, 2022. ufc direct operating costs increased by $57.8 million, or 18%. this increase was primarily due to higher costs of $45.7 million from different athlete matchups, as well as higher production costs associated with having one additional ppv event and five additional international events than in the prior year, and direct costs associated with the increase in revenue described above. the increase was also driven by greater marketing and venue expenses due to having 26 events with live audiences compared to 21 events in the same prior year period. wwe contributed direct operating costs of $127.8 million for the period from september 12, 2023 through december 31, 2023 following its acquisition. these costs were primarily driven by talent and production-related costs associated with wwe’s premium live events and weekly television programming, as well as event-related costs associated with 76 live events during the period and $2.1 million of charges associated with restructuring activities related to the transactions. corporate direct operating costs increased by $3.4 million. this increase was primarily related to service fees paid to endeavor for various operational functions that support revenue generating activities pursuant to the services agreement. selling, general and administrative expenses selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $339.0 million, or 161%, to $549.1 million for the year ended december 31, 2023 compared to the year ended december 31, 2022. ufc selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $16.9 million, or 11%. this increase was primarily driven by higher cost of personnel from greater headcount and increased travel expenses and other operating expenses associated with having one additional ppv events and five additional international events than in the prior year. wwe contributed selling, general and administrative expenses of $134.4 million, which was primarily driven by $94.8 million of personnel costs, including $28.5 million of charges associated with restructuring activities related to the transactions, as well as travel and other operating expenses for the period from september 12, 2023 through december 31, 2023. corporate selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $187.7 million. this increase was primarily due to $83.8 million of professional fees and bonuses incurred related to the transactions during the current year period, as well as $32.0 million of higher cost of personnel and other operating expenses, including tko executive compensation and other public company expenses following the transactions. the acquisition of wwe contributed $71.9 million of expenses to corporate, which was primarily driven by legal costs, including a legal settlement of $20.0 million, as well as personnel costs, including $10.8 million of charges associated with restructuring activities related to the transactions. depreciation and amortization depreciation and amortization increased $104.6 million, or 174%, to $164.6 million for the year ended december 31, 2023 compared to the year ended december 31, 2022. the increase was primarily due to $103.8 million of expenses associated with the acquisition of wwe. interest expense, net interest expense, net increased $99.4 million, or 71%, to $239.0 million for the year ended december 31, 2023 compared to the year ended december 31, 2022. the increase was primarily driven by significantly higher interest rates on variable rate debt slightly offset by lower indebtedness. provision for income taxes for the year ended december 31, 2023, tko recorded a provision for income taxes of $31.5 million compared to a provision of $14.3 million for the year ended december 31, 2022. this was primarily related to an increase in federal u.s. tax due to tko’s new corporate structure as a result of the transactions. 46 net (loss) income attributable to non-controlling interests net (loss) income attributable to non-controlling interests was a loss of $32.5 million and income of $1.7 million for the years ended december 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. the change was primarily due to the change in the amount of reported net income for the year ended december 31, 2023 as compared to the reported net income for the year ended december 31, 2022 as well as the effect of the transactions. segment results of operations as of december 31, 2023, we classified our business into two reportable segments: ufc and wwe. our chief operating decision maker evaluates the performance of our segments based on segment revenue and segment adjusted ebitda. management believes segment adjusted ebitda is indicative of operational performance and ongoing profitability, and adjusted ebitda is used to evaluate the operating performance of our segments and for planning and forecasting purposes, including the allocation of resources and capital. segment operating results reflect earnings before corporate expenses. these segment results of operations should be read in conjunction with our discussion of the company’s consolidated results of operations included above. the following tables set forth revenue and adjusted ebitda for each of our segments for the years ended december 31, 2023, and 2022: year ended december 31, 2023 2022 revenue: ufc $ 1,292.2 $ 1,140.1 wwe 382.8 — total revenue $ 1,675.0 $ 1,140.1 year ended december 31, 2023 2022 adjusted ebitda: ufc $ 755.7 $ 680.6 wwe 163.0 — corporate (109.6) (51.9) total adjusted ebitda $ 809.1 $ 628.7 47 ufc the following table sets forth our ufc segment results for the years ended december 31, 2023 and 2022: year ended december 31, 2023 2022 revenue media rights and content $ 870.6 $ 794.4 live events 167.9 125.3 sponsorship 196.3 166.8 consumer products licensing 57.4 53.6 total revenue $ 1,292.2 $ 1,140.1 direct operating costs $ 383.4 $ 325.6 selling, general and administrative expenses $ 153.1 $ 133.9 adjusted ebitda $ 755.7 $ 680.6 adjusted ebitda margin 58 % 60 % operating metrics number of events numbered events 14 13 fight nights 29 29 total events 43 42 location of events united states 33 37 international 10 5 total events 43 42 wwe the following table sets forth our wwe segment results for the post-acquisition period from september 12, 2023 through december 31, 2023: year ended december 31, 2023 2022 revenue media rights and content $ 249.5 $ — live events 87.7 — sponsorship 18.0 — consumer products licensing 27.6 — total revenue $ 382.8 $ — direct operating costs $ 125.7 $ — selling, general and administrative expenses $ 94.1 $ — adjusted ebitda $ 163.0 $ — adjusted ebitda margin 43 % — operating metrics number of events premium live events 3 n/a televised events 27 n/a non-televised events 46 n/a total events 76 n/a location of events united states 66 n/a international 10 n/a total events 76 n/a 48 corporate corporate expenses relate largely to corporate activities, including information technology, facilities, legal, human resources, finance, accounting, treasury, investor relations, corporate communications, community relations and compensation to tko’s management and board of directors, which support both reportable segments. corporate expenses also include service fees paid by the company to endeavor related to corporate activities as well as revenue generating activities under the services agreement. the following table displays results for corporate for the years ended december 31, 2023 and 2022: year ended december 31, 2023 2022 adjusted ebitda $ (109.6) $ (51.9) adjusted ebitda for the year ended december 31, 2023 decreased by $57.7 million, or 111%, compared to the year ended december 31, 2022. the acquisition of wwe contributed corporate expenses of $31.7 million for the period from september 12, 2023 through december 31, 2023, primarily driven by the cost of personnel and other general and administrative expenses. the remaining decrease of $26.0 million was driven by increases in cost of personnel, including tko executive compensation following the transactions, and other general and administrative expenses, including public company expenses following the transactions. non-gaap financial measures adjusted ebitda is a non-gaap financial measure and is defined as net income, excluding income taxes, net interest expense, depreciation and amortization, equity-based compensation, merger and acquisition costs, certain legal costs, restructuring, severance and impairment charges, and certain other items when applicable. adjusted ebitda margin is a non-gaap financial measure defined as adjusted ebitda divided by revenue. tko management believes that adjusted ebitda is useful to investors as it eliminates the significant level of non-cash depreciation and amortization expense that results from its capital investments and intangible assets, and improves comparability by eliminating the significant level of interest expense associated with tko’s debt facilities, as well as income taxes which may not be comparable with other companies based on tko’s tax and corporate structure. adjusted ebitda and adjusted ebitda margin are used as the primary bases to evaluate tko’s consolidated operating performance. adjusted ebitda and adjusted ebitda margin have limitations as analytical tools, and you should not consider them in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of tko’s results as reported under gaap. some of these limitations are: they do not reflect every cash expenditure, future requirements for capital expenditures, or contractual commitments; adjusted ebitda does not reflect the significant interest expense or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments on tko’s debt; although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced or require improvements in the future, and adjusted ebitda and adjusted ebitda margin do not reflect any cash requirement for such replacements or improvements; and they are not adjusted for all non-cash income or expense items that are reflected in tko’s statements of cash flows. tko management compensates for these limitations by using adjusted ebitda and adjusted ebitda margin along with other comparative tools, together with gaap measurements, to assist in the evaluation of tko’s operating performance. adjusted ebitda and adjusted ebitda margin should not be considered substitutes for the reported results prepared in accordance with gaap and should not be considered in isolation or as alternatives to net income as indicators of tko’s financial performance, as measures of discretionary cash available to it to invest in the growth of its business or as measures of cash that will be available to tko to meet its obligations. although tko uses adjusted ebitda and adjusted ebitda margin as financial measures to assess the performance of its business, such use is limited because it does not include certain material costs necessary to operate tko’s business. tko’s presentation of adjusted ebitda and adjusted ebitda margin should not be construed as indications that its future results will be unaffected by unusual or nonrecurring items. these non-gaap financial measures, as determined and presented by tko, may not be comparable to related or similarly titled measures reported by other companies. set forth below are reconciliations of tko’s most directly comparable financial measures calculated in accordance with gaap to these non-gaap financial measures on a consolidated basis. 49 adjusted ebitda and adjusted ebitda margin year ended december 31, 2023 2022 reconciliation of net income to adjusted ebitda net income $ 175.7 $ 389.0 provision for income taxes 31.5 14.3 interest expense, net 239.0 139.6 depreciation and amortization 164.6 60.0 equity-based compensation expense (1) 57.1 23.7 merger and acquisition costs (2) 83.8 — certain legal costs (3) 34.2 0.8 restructuring, severance and impairment (4) 21.5 — other adjustments (5) 1.7 1.3 total adjusted ebitda $ 809.1 $ 628.7 net income margin 10 % 34 % adjusted ebitda margin 48 % 55 % (1)equity-based compensation represents non-cash compensation expense for awards issued under endeavor’s 2021 plan subsequent to its april 28, 2021 ipo, for the replacement awards and for awards issued under the 2023 incentive award plan. for the year ended december 31, 2023, equity-based compensation includes $19.9 million of expense associated with accelerated vesting of the replacement awards related to the workforce reduction of certain employees in the wwe segment and corporate. (2)includes certain costs of professional fees and bonuses related to the transactions and payable contingent on the closing of the transactions. (3)includes costs related to certain litigation matters including antitrust matters for ufc and wwe, matters where mr. mcmahon has agreed to make future payments to certain counterparties personally and, for the year ended december 31, 2023, the settlement of a wwe antitrust matter for $20.0 million. (4)includes costs resulting from the company’s cost reduction program during the year ended december 31, 2023, as described in note 17, restructuring charges, to our audited consolidated financial statements. (5)for the year ended december 31, 2023, other adjustments was comprised primarily of losses of $1.4 million and $1.1 million, respectively, on the disposal of assets and foreign exchange transactions. for the year ended december 31, 2022, other adjustments was comprised primarily of losses of $1.3 million on foreign exchange transactions. liquidity and capital resources sources and uses of cash cash flows from operations are used to fund tko’s day-to-day operations, revenue-generating activities, and routine capital expenditures, as well as service its long-term debt. credit facilities as of december 31, 2023, there was outstanding an aggregate of $2.7 billion of first lien term loans under a credit agreement dated august 18, 2016 (as amended and/or restated, the “credit agreement”), by and among zuffa guarantor, llc, ufc holdings, llc, as borrower, the lenders party hereto and goldman sachs bank usa, as administrative agent, which was entered into in connection with the acquisition of zuffa by egh in 2016. the facilities under the credit agreement consist of (i) a first lien secured term loan (the “first lien term loan”) and (ii) a secured revolving credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of $205.0 million, letters of credit in an aggregate face amount not in excess of $40.0 million and swingline loans in an aggregate principal amount not in excess of $15.0 million (collectively, the “revolving credit facility”, and, together with the first lien term loan, the “credit facilities”). the credit facilities are secured by liens on substantially all of the assets of zuffa guarantor, llc, ufc holdings, llc and certain subsidiaries thereof. following a repricing under the credit facilities in january 2021, term loan borrowings under the credit facilities bore interest at a variable interest rate equal to either, at its option, adjusted libor or the abr plus, in each case, an applicable margin. libor term loans accrue interest at a rate equal to an adjusted libor plus 2.75%-3.00%, depending on the first lien leverage ratio (as defined in the credit agreement), in each case with a libor floor of 0.75%. abr term loans accrue interest at a rate equal to (i) the highest of (a) the federal funds effective rate plus 0.5%, (b) the prime rate, (c) adjusted libor for a one-month interest period plus 1.00% and (d) 1.75%, plus (ii) 1.75%-2.00%. in june 2023, the parties amended the terms of the first lien term loan to replace the adjusted libor reference rate with term secured overnight financing rate (“sofr”) plus a credit spread adjustment (as defined in the credit agreement). the term loans under the credit facilities include 1% principal amortization payable in equal quarterly installments and mature on april 29, 2026. in december 2022, the company repaid $50.0 million of term loans under the credit facilities. 50 as of december 31, 2023, the company had the option to borrow incremental term loans in an aggregate amount equal to at least $455.0 million, subject to market demand, and may be able to borrow additional funds depending on its first lien leverage ratio. the credit agreement includes certain mandatory prepayment provisions relating to, among other things, the incurrence of additional debt. the revolving credit facility has $205.0 million of total borrowing capacity and letter of credit and swingline loan sub-limits of up to $40.0 million and $15.0 million, respectively. revolving loan borrowings under the credit facilities bear interest at a variable interest rate equal to either, at tko’s option, adjusted libor or abr plus, in each case, an applicable margin. libor revolving loans accrue interest at a rate equal to an adjusted libor plus 3.50-4.00%, depending on the first lien leverage ratio, in each case with a libor floor of 0.00%. abr revolving loans accrue interest at a rate equal to (i) the highest of (a) the federal funds effective rate plus 0.50%, (b) the prime rate, (c) adjusted libor for a one-month interest period plus 1.00% and (d) 1.00%, plus (ii) 2.50-3.00%, depending on the first lien leverage ratio. in april 2023, the parties amended the terms of the revolving credit facility to replace adjusted libor reference rate used for the facility with sofr plus 2.75-3.00%. the company pays a commitment fee of 0.25-0.50%, based on the first lien leverage ratio and letter of credit fees of 0.125%. in november 2023, the company borrowed $100.0 million under its revolving credit facility to fund certain share repurchases that occurred during the fourth quarter of 2023. in december 2023, the company fully repaid the $100.0 million amount outstanding. as of december 31, 2023, the company had no borrowings outstanding under the revolving credit facility and no outstanding letters of credit. the revolving credit facility matures on october 29, 2024. the revolving credit facility is subject to a financial covenant if greater than 35% of the borrowing capacity of the revolving credit facility (excluding cash collateralized letters of credit and non-cash collateralized letters of credit of up to $10.0 million) is utilized at the end of any fiscal quarter. this covenant was not applicable on december 31, 2023, as the company had no borrowings outstanding under the revolving credit facility. the credit agreement contains certain restrictive covenants around indebtedness, liens, fundamental changes, guarantees, investments, asset sales and transactions with affiliates. the borrower’s obligations under the credit facilities are guaranteed by certain of tko opco’s indirect wholly owned domestic restricted subsidiaries, subject to certain exceptions. restrictions on dividends the credit agreement contains restrictions on tko’s ability to make distributions and other payments from the respective credit groups. these restrictions on dividends include exceptions for, among other things, (1) amounts necessary to make tax payments, (2) a limited annual amount for employee equity repurchases, (3) distributions required to fund certain parent entities, (4) other specific allowable situations and (5) a general restricted payment basket, which generally provides for no restrictions as long as the total leverage ratio (as defined in the credit agreement) is less than 5.0x. other debt in october 2018, ufc entered into a $28.0 million loan agreement and a $12.0 million loan agreement in order to finance the purchase of a building and its adjacent land (the “secured commercial loans”). the secured commercial loans have identical terms except the $28.0 million loan agreement is secured by a deed of trust for ufc’s headquarters building and underlying land in las vegas and the $12.0 million loan agreement is secured by a deed of trust for the acquired building and its adjacent land, also located in las vegas. the secured commercial loans bear interest at a rate of libor plus 1.62% (with a libor floor of 0.88%). in may 2023, the parties amended the terms of the secured commercial loans to replace the adjusted libor reference rate with sofr, and bear interest at a rate of sofr plus 1.70%. principal amortization of 4% is payable in monthly installments with any remaining balance payable on the final maturity date of november 1, 2028. the applicable loan agreements each contain a financial covenant that requires ufc to maintain a debt service coverage ratio as defined in the applicable loan agreements of no more than 1.15-to-1 as measured on an annual basis (the “secured commercial loan covenant”). as of december 31, 2023, ufc was in compliance with the secured commercial loan covenant. cash flows overview year ended december 31, (in millions) 2023 2022 net cash provided by operating activities $ 468.4 $ 501.7 net cash provided by (used in) investing activities $ 12.3 $ (13.3) net cash used in financing activities $ (424.5) $ (1,181.4) operating activities decreased from $501.7 million of cash provided in the year ended december 31, 2022 to $468.4 million of cash provided in the year ended december 31, 2023. cash provided in the year ended december 31, 2023 was primarily due to a decline in net income for the period of $213.3 million, which included an increase in certain non-cash items, including depreciation and amortization of $104.6 million and equity-based compensation of $33.4 million, coupled with the increase in accounts payable and 51 accrued liabilities of $18.5 million primarily due to the timing of events and incentive compensation. cash provided in the year ended december 31, 2022 was primarily due to an increase in net income for the period of $115.4 million, which included a decrease in certain non-cash items, including equity-based compensation of $40.1 million, partially offset by the increase in accounts receivable of $30.8 million and decrease in deferred revenue of $18.8 million which were both driven by the timing of events and customer payments. investing activities increased from $13.3 million of cash used in the year ended december 31, 2022 to $12.3 million of cash provided in the year ended december 31, 2023. cash provided in the year ended december 31, 2023 primarily reflects $381.2 million of cash acquired from wwe as part of the transactions partially offset by the payment of $321.0 million of deferred compensation in the form of a dividend to former wwe shareholders. during the year ended december 31, 2023, the company also made purchases of $48.6 million related to payments for property, buildings and equipment. cash used in the year ended december 31, 2022 primarily reflects payments for property, buildings and equipment. financing activities decreased from $1,181.4 million of cash used in the year ended december 31, 2022 to $424.5 million of cash used in the year ended december 31, 2023. cash used in the year ended december 31, 2023 primarily reflects net distributions to endeavor and subsidiaries of $296.6 million, share repurchases of $100.0 million of common stock and net payments on debt of $33.4 million. cash used in the year ended december 31, 2022 primarily reflects distributions to endeavor and subsidiaries of $1,095.9 million and net payments on debt of $82.6 million. future sources and uses of liquidity tko’s sources of liquidity are (1) cash on hand, (2) cash flows from operations and (3) available borrowings under the credit facilities (which borrowings would be subject to certain restrictive covenants contained therein). based on its current expectations, tko believes that these sources of liquidity will be sufficient to fund its working capital requirements and to meet its commitments, including long-term debt service, for at least the next 12 months. tko expects that its primary liquidity needs will be cash to (1) provide capital to facilitate organic growth of its business, (2) pay operating expenses, including cash compensation to its employees, athletes and talent, (3) fund capital expenditures, (4) pay interest and principal when due on the credit facilities, (5) pay income taxes, (6) reduce its outstanding indebtedness under the credit facilities and (7) as may become applicable, make distributions to tko stockholders, pursuant to the company’s dividend policy. tko expects to refinance the credit facilities prior to the maturity of the outstanding loans in 2026. it currently anticipates being able to secure funding for such refinancing at favorable terms; however, its ability to do so may be impacted by many factors, including tko’s growth and other factors specific to its business as well as macro-economic factors beyond its control. contractual obligations, commitments and contingencies the following table represents our contractual obligations as of december 31, 2023, aggregated by type: after (in millions) 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2028 total long-term debt, principal payments (1) $ 32.6 $ 32.6 $ 2,668.4 $ 1.6 $ 25.4 $ — $ 2,760.6 long-term debt, interest payments (2) 235.3 230.7 113.5 1.3 1.0 — 581.8 operating leases (3) 6.8 6.6 6.3 5.8 4.3 20.4 50.2 finance leases (3) (4) 27.6 24.6 24.6 20.6 19.5 498.6 615.5 service contracts and commitments (5) 134.8 133.5 95.9 72.5 73.1 125.0 634.8 total commitments $ 437.1 $ 428.0 $ 2,908.7 $ 101.8 $ 123.3 $ 644.0 $ 4,642.9 (1)the principal balance of certain debt is repaid on a quarterly basis, with the balance due at maturity. see note 8, debt, to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report for further detail. (2)variable interest rate payments on our long-term debt are calculated based on the current interest rate as of december 31, 2023 and the scheduled maturity of the underlying loans. (3)our operating and finance leases are primarily for office facilities and equipment. certain of these leases contain provisions for rent escalations or lease concessions. the obligations disclosed in the table above are presented on an undiscounted basis. see note 20, leases, to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report for further detail. (4)our finance lease payments include $358.8 million related to options to extend wwe’s global headquarters lease that are reasonably certain of being exercised. (5)see note 21, commitments and contingencies, to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report for further detail. 52 critical accounting estimates the preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make assumptions, estimates or judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. we base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. these assumptions, estimates or judgments, however, are both subjective and subject to change, and actual results may differ from our assumptions and estimates. we believe the following estimates related to certain of our critical accounting policies could potentially produce materially different results if we were to change underlying assumptions, estimates or judgments. see note 2, summary of significant accounting policies, to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this annual report for a summary of our significant accounting policies. revenue recognition we have revenue recognition policies for our various operating segments that are appropriate to the circumstances of each business. in accordance with asc 606, revenue from contracts with customers (“asc 606”), revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to the company’s customers either at a point in time or over time, in an amount that reflects the consideration the company expects to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. asc 606 requires additional disclosures about the nature, amount, timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from customer contracts, including significant judgments and estimates, and changes in those estimates. arrangements with multiple performance obligations we have various types of contracts with multiple performance obligations, primarily consisting of multi-year sponsorship and media rights agreements. the transaction price in these types of contracts is allocated on a relative standalone selling price basis. we typically determine the standalone selling price of individual performance obligations based on management estimates, unless standalone selling prices are observable through past transactions. estimates used to determine a performance obligation’s standalone selling price impact the amount and timing of revenue recognized, but not the total amount of revenue to be recognized under the arrangement. principal versus agent we enter into many arrangements that require management to determine whether we are acting as a principal or an agent. this determination involves judgment and requires evaluation as to whether the company controls the goods or services before they are transferred to the customer. as part of this analysis, the company considers whether we are primarily responsible for fulfillment of the promise to provide the specified service, have inventory risk and have discretion in establishing prices. for events, this determination is primarily based on whether we own and control the event. for media rights distribution, this determination is primarily based on whether we have control over the media rights including inventory risk and setting pricing with customers. for re-billable expenses related to advertising and brand activation services, this determination is primarily based on whether we are responsible for fulfillment of the services to the customer. if our determinations were to change, the amounts of our revenue and operating expenses may be different. timing of recognition media rights and content revenue broadcast and streaming rights fees received from distributors of our live event and television programming, both domestic and internationally, are recorded when the live event or program has been delivered and is available for distribution. certain of our media rights are typically sold in multi-year arrangements and are generally comprised of multiple performance obligations that involve the allocation of transaction price based on the relative standalone selling price of each performance obligation. tko uses its estimate of standalone selling price to allocate transaction price. any advance payments received from distributors are deferred upon collection and recognized into revenue as content is delivered. we recognize revenue from ppv programming from live sporting events when the event is aired. ppv programming is distributed through cable, satellite and digital providers. ufc and wwe receive a fixed license fee for its domestic residential ppv programming under a long-term contract. for ufc and wwe’s international and commercial ppv, the amount of revenue recognized is based upon management’s initial estimate of variable consideration related to the number of buys achieved. this initial estimate is based on preliminary buy information received from certain ppv distributors and is subject to adjustment as new information regarding the number of buys is received, which is generally up to 120 days subsequent to the live event. if our estimates of buys achieved were to change, the timing and amount of its revenue may be different. 53 ufc owns and operates its own over-the-top (“ott”) platform ufc fight pass that engages customers through a subscription based model. subscriptions are offered to customers for one-month, six-month and 12-month access to ufc fight pass. wwe distributes content through its platform wwe network, which collects licensing fees from distribution partners and collects monthly subscription fees. subscription revenue for ufc fight pass and wwe network is recognized ratably over each paid monthly membership period and revenue is deferred for subscriptions paid in advance until earned. live event revenue live event revenue is generally recognized at the time that an event occurs. advance ticket and vip package sales are recorded as deferred revenue pending the event date. sponsorship revenue customer contracts for advertising and sponsorship rights are generally comprised of multiple performance obligations that involve the allocation of the arrangement consideration to the underlying deliverables based upon their standalone selling price. we use an adjusted market assessment approach as our estimate of standalone selling price to allocate arrangement consideration as the performance obligations under customer contracts are infrequently sold on a standalone basis either by ufc, wwe or other third parties. after allocating revenue to each performance obligation, we recognize sponsorship revenue when the promotional service is delivered. if our estimates of standalone selling prices were to change, the timing and amount of our revenue may be different. licensing revenue licensing revenue relates to royalties earned from sales of licensed merchandise and digital products. the nature of the licensing arrangements is typically symbolic intellectual property, inclusive of logos, trade names, and trademarks related to merchandise sales. many licensing agreements include minimum guarantees, which set forth the minimum royalty to be paid during a given contract year. we will recognize the minimum guarantee revenue ratably over its related royalties’ contract period until such point that it is more likely than not that the total revenue during the royalty period will exceed the minimum royalty. if during the royalty period, management determines that total revenue will exceed the minimum royalty, the revenue recognized during each reporting period will reflect royalties earned on the underlying product sales. for licensing agreements without minimum guarantees, we recognize revenue related to the sales or usage of the underlying symbolic intellectual property over time as the sales or usage occurs. the amount of revenue recognized is based on either statements received or management’s best estimate of sales or usage in a period, if statements are received on a lag. if our estimates and judgments were to change, the timing and amount of revenue recognized may be different. goodwill goodwill is tested annually as of october 1 for impairment and at any time upon the occurrence of certain events or substantive changes in circumstances that indicate the carrying amount of goodwill may not be recoverable. we perform our goodwill impairment test at the reporting unit level, which is one level below the operating segment level. we have two operating and reportable segments, consistent with the way management makes decisions and allocates resources to the business. we have the option to perform a qualitative assessment to determine if an impairment is more likely than not to have occurred. a qualitative assessment includes, but is not limited to, consideration of the results of our most recent quantitative impairment test, consideration of macroeconomic conditions, and industry and market conditions. if we can support the conclusion that it is “not more likely than not” that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount under the qualitative assessment, we would not need to perform the quantitative impairment test for that reporting unit. if we cannot support such a conclusion or we do not elect to perform the qualitative assessment then we must perform the quantitative impairment test. the first step of the goodwill impairment test is used to identify potential impairment by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount, including goodwill. to determine the fair value of our reporting units, we generally use a present value technique (discounted cash flows) corroborated by market multiples when available and as appropriate. we apply what we believe to be the most appropriate valuation methodology for each of our reporting units. we believe our estimates of fair value are consistent with how a marketplace participant would value our reporting units. the discounted cash flow analyses are sensitive to our estimates of future revenue growth and margins for these businesses along with discount rates. our long-term cash flow projections are estimates and inherently subject to uncertainty, particularly during periods of adverse economic conditions. significant estimates and assumptions specific to each reporting unit include revenue growth, profit margins, terminal value growth rates, discount rates and other assumptions deemed reasonable by management. where a market approach is utilized, we use judgment in identifying the relevant comparable-company market multiples. these estimates and assumptions may vary between each reporting unit depending on the facts and circumstances specific to that unit. if we had established different reporting units or utilized different valuation methodologies or assumptions, the impairment test results could differ. 54 if the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, such excess is recognized as an impairment. for the year ended december 31, 2023, our annual impairment test resulted in no impairment charges. we believe that the estimates and assumptions we made in our quantitative analysis are reasonable, but they are susceptible to change from period to period. actual results of operations, cash flows and other factors will likely differ from the estimates used in our valuation, and it is possible that differences and changes could be material. a deterioration in profitability, adverse market conditions, significant customer losses, changes in spending levels of our existing customers or a different economic outlook than currently estimated by management could have a significant impact on the estimated fair value of our reporting units and could result in an impairment charge in the future. intangible assets for finite-lived intangible assets that are amortized, we evaluate assets for recoverability when there is an indication of potential impairment or when the useful lives are no longer appropriate. if the estimated undiscounted future cash flows from a group of assets being evaluated is less than the carrying value of that group of assets, an impairment would be measured as the difference between the fair value of the group’s long-lived assets and the carrying value of the group’s long-lived assets. we define an asset group by identifying the lowest level of cash flows generated by a group of assets that are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets. if identified, the impairment is allocated to the long-lived assets of the group on a pro rata basis using the relative carrying amounts, but only to the extent the carrying value of each asset is above its fair value. determining whether a long-lived asset is impaired requires various estimates and assumptions, including whether a triggering event has occurred, the identification of the asset groups, estimates of future cash flows and the discount rate used to determine fair values. if we had established different asset groups or utilized different valuation methodologies or assumptions, the impairment test results could differ, and we could be required to record impairment charges. equity-based compensation we grant equity awards to certain executives, employees and service providers, which may be in the form of various equity-based awards such as restricted stock, restricted stock units and stock options. we record compensation costs related to our equity awards issued to executives and other employees based on the grant date fair value of the award. compensation cost for time-based awards is recognized ratably over the applicable vesting period and compensation cost for awards with a performance condition is reassessed each period and recognized based upon the probability that the performance conditions will be achieved. the awards with a performance condition are expensed when the achievement of performance conditions is probable. compensation cost for performance-based awards with a market condition is recognized regardless of the number of units that vest based on the market condition and is recognized on straight-line basis over the estimated service period, with each tranche separately measured. compensation expense is not reversed even if the market condition is not satisfied. replacement awards pursuant to the transaction agreement, the company converted each wwe equity award of restricted stock units (“rsus”) and performance stock units (“psus”) held by wwe directors, officers and employees into tko rsus and psus of equal value and vesting conditions (with such performance-vesting conditions equitably adjusted), respectively (the “replacement awards”). the value of the replacement awards was determined using the closing price of wwe class a common stock, par value $0.01 per share (“wwe class a common stock”), on the day immediately preceding the closing of the transactions. the portion of the replacement awards issued in connection with the transactions that was associated with services rendered prior to the date of the transactions was included in the total consideration transferred. with regards to the remaining unvested portion of the replacement awards, equity-based compensation costs of rsus are recognized over the total remaining service period on a straight-line basis with forfeitures recognized as they occur. rsus have a service requirement and generally vest in equal annual installments over a three-year period. unvested rsus accrue dividend equivalents at the same rate as are paid on shares of class a common stock. the dividend equivalents are subject to the same vesting schedule as the underlying rsus. psus, which are subject to certain performance conditions and have a service requirement, generally vest in equal installments over a three-year period. until such time as the performance conditions are met, stock compensation costs associated with these psus are re-measured each reporting period based upon the fair market value of the company’s common stock and the estimated performance attainment on the reporting date. the ultimate number of psus that are issued to an employee is the result of the actual performance of the company at the end of the performance period compared to the performance conditions. compensation costs for psus are recognized using a graded-vesting attribution method over the vesting period based upon the probability that the performance conditions will be achieved, with forfeitures recognized as they occur. unvested psus accrue dividend equivalents once the performance conditions are 55 met at the same rate as are paid on shares of class a common stock. the dividend equivalents are subject to the same vesting schedule as the underlying psus. we estimate the fair value of stock options using an option-pricing model, which requires us to make certain estimates and assumptions, such as: expected term – the expected term represents the period that our awards are expected to be outstanding, giving considerations to vesting schedules and expiration dates (if applicable). we use the simplified method for estimating the expected term of the stock options. expected volatility – as we do not have a sufficient public market trading history, the expected volatility is estimated based on the historical volatility of public companies that are deemed to be comparable to us over the expected term of the award. industry peers consist of several public companies in our industry which are either similar in size, stage of life cycle or financial leverage. risk-free interest rate – we base the risk-free interest rate on the u.s. treasury yield curve in effect at the time the awards are granted. expected dividends – we do not anticipate paying any cash dividends in the foreseeable future and therefore use an expected dividend yield of zero. the assumptions used in our option-pricing model represent management’s best estimates. these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. if factors change and different assumptions are used, our equity-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future. income taxes tko group holdings, inc. was incorporated as a delaware corporation in march 2023. as the sole managing member of tko opco, tko group holdings, inc. operates and controls all the business and affairs of ufc and wwe. tko group holdings, inc. is subject to corporate income taxes on its share of taxable income of tko opco. tko opco is treated as a partnership for u.s. federal income tax purposes and is therefore generally not subject to u.s. corporate income tax, other than entity-level income taxes in certain u.s. state and local jurisdictions. tko opco’s foreign subsidiaries are subject to entity-level taxes, and tko opco’s u.s. subsidiaries are subject to foreign withholding taxes on sales in certain foreign jurisdictions which are included as a component of foreign current taxes. deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. the effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. significant factors considered by us in estimating the probability of the realization of deferred tax assets include expectations of future earnings and taxable income, as well as application of tax laws in the jurisdictions in which we operate. a valuation allowance is provided when we determine that it is “more likely than not” that a portion of a deferred tax asset will not be realized. our deferred tax positions may change if our estimates regarding future realization of deferred tax assets were to change. a minimum probability threshold for a tax position must be met before a financial statement benefit is recognized. the tax benefit to be recognized is measured as the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. the tax benefits ultimately realized by us may differ from those recognized in our financial statements based on a number of factors, including our decision to settle rather than litigate a matter, relevant legal precedent related to similar matters and our success in supporting its filing positions with taxing authorities. we recognize interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits on the income tax expense line in the consolidated statements of operations. accrued interest and penalties are included in the related tax liability line in the consolidated balance sheet. consolidation we typically consolidate entities in which we own more than 50% of the voting common stock and control operations, as well as variable interest entities (“vie”) for which we are deemed the primary beneficiary. evaluating whether an entity in which we have a variable interest is a vie and whether we are the primary beneficiary requires management to make significant judgments involving evaluating the fair value and capitalization of the investee along with the most significant activities of the entity and the party that has power over those activities. 56 business combinations we account for our business combinations under the acquisition method of accounting. identifiable assets acquired, liabilities assumed and any non-controlling interest in the acquiree are recognized and measured as of the acquisition date at fair value. additionally, contingent consideration is recorded at fair value on the acquisition date and classified as a liability. goodwill is recognized to the extent by which the aggregate of the acquisition-date fair value of the consideration transferred and any non-controlling interest in the acquiree exceeds the recognized basis of the identifiable assets acquired, net of assumed liabilities. determining the fair value of assets acquired, liabilities assumed and non-controlling interest requires management’s judgment and often involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including assumptions with respect to future cash flows, discount rates and asset lives, among other items. during the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments, in the period in which they are determined, to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed with the corresponding offset to goodwill. upon the conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the values of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recognized in the consolidated statements of operations. non-controlling interests non-controlling interests in consolidated subsidiaries represent the component of common equity in consolidated subsidiaries held by third parties. non-controlling interests with redemption features, such as put options, that are redeemable outside of our control are considered redeemable non-controlling interests and are classified as temporary equity on the consolidated balance sheet. redeemable non-controlling interests are recorded at the greater of carrying value, which is adjusted for the non-controlling interests’ share of net income or loss, or estimated redemption value at each reporting period. estimating the fair value or other redemption value requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions specific to each non-controlling interest including revenue growth, profit margins, terminal value growth rates, discount rates under the income approach and other assumptions such as market multiples for comparable companies. these estimates and assumptions may vary between each redeemable non-controlling interest depending on the facts and circumstances specific to that consolidated subsidiary. recent accounting pronouncements see note 3, recent accounting pronouncements, to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this annual report for further information on certain accounting standards that have been recently adopted or that have not yet been required to be implemented and may be applicable to our future operations. ite