the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes to those statements included in “item 8. financial statements and supplementary data” to this annual report on form 10-k. in addition to historical financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, beliefs and expectations, and involve risks and uncertainties. factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this annual report on form 10-k, particularly in the section titled “item 1a. risk factors” and the “special note about forward-looking statements.” overview we are a global technology company that empowers buyers of advertising. through our self-service, cloud-based platform, ad buyers can create, manage and optimize more expressive data-driven digital advertising campaigns across ad formats, including display, video, audio, native and social, on a multitude of devices, such as computers, mobile devices and ctv. our platform’s integrations with major data, inventory and publisher partners provide ad buyers reach and decisioning capabilities, and our enterprise apis enable our clients to develop on top of the platform. we commercially launched our platform in 2011, targeting the display advertising channel and have continued to add additional advertising channels. in 2021, the gross spend on our platform came from multiple channels including mobile, video (which includes ctv), display, audio, native, digital-out-of-home and social channels. our clients are primarily the advertising agencies and other service providers for advertisers, with whom we enter into ongoing msas. we generate revenue by charging our clients a platform fee based on a percentage of a client’s total spend on advertising. we also generate revenue from providing data and other value-added services and platform features. executive summary highlights year ended december 31, change 2021 2020 $ % (in millions, except percentages) revenue $ 1,197 $ 836 $ 361 43 % net income $ 138 $ 242 $ (104 ) (43 )% gross spend (1) $ 6,172 $ 4,199 $ 1,973 47 % _______ (1) for internal management purposes, we utilize gross spend as a metric to assess our market share and scale, plan for optimal levels of support for our clients and measure our growth from existing clients. gross spend measures the value of a client’s purchases through our platform plus our platform fee we charge clients, which is a percentage of a client’s purchases through our platform. we expect our revenue as a percentage of gross spend, which is sometimes referred to as take rate, to fluctuate due to the types of services and features selected by our clients through our platform and certain volume discounts. other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate gross spend or similarly titled measures differently, which reduces its usefulness as a comparative measure. trends, opportunities and challenges the growing digitization of media and fragmentation of audiences has increased the complexity of advertising, and thereby increased the need for automation in ad buying, which we provide on our platform. in order to grow, we will need to continue to develop our platform’s programmatic capabilities and advertising inventory. we believe that key opportunities include our ongoing global expansion, continuing development of our ctv, video, audio, and native ad inventory, and continuing development of the data, usage, measurement and targeting capabilities provided by our platform. we believe that growth of the programmatic advertising market is important for our ability to grow our business. adoption of programmatic advertising by advertisers allows us to acquire new clients and grow revenue from existing clients. although our clients include some of the largest advertising agencies in the world, we believe there is significant room for us to expand further within these clients and gain a larger amount of their advertising spend through our platform. we also believe that the industry trends noted above will lead to advertisers adopting programmatic advertising through platforms such as ours. similarly, the adoption of programmatic advertising by inventory owners and content providers allows us to expand the volume and type of advertising inventory that we present to our clients. for example, we have expanded our ctv, native and audio advertising offerings through our integrations with supply-side partners. we invest for long-term growth. we anticipate that our operating expenses will continue to increase significantly in the foreseeable future as we invest in platform operations and technology and development to enhance our product features, including programmatic buying of ctv ad inventory, and in sales and marketing to acquire new clients and reinforce our relationships with 38 existing clients. in addition, we expect to continue making investments in our infrastructure, including our information technology, financial and administrative systems and controls, to support our growing operations. we believe the markets outside of the united states, and in particular china, offer an opportunity for growth, although such markets may also pose challenges related to compliance with local laws and regulations, restrictions on foreign ownership or investment, uncertainty related to trade relations and a variety of additional risks. we intend to make additional investments in sales and marketing and product development to expand in international markets, including china, where we are making significant investments in our platform and growing our team. we believe that these investments will contribute to our long-term growth, although they may negatively impact profitability in the near term. our business model has allowed us to grow significantly, and we believe that our operating leverage enables us to support future growth profitably. covid-19 the worldwide spread of covid-19, including the emergence of variants, has resulted, and may continue to result, in a global slowdown of economic activity, which may decrease demand for a broad variety of goods and services, including those provided by our clients, while also disrupting supply channels, sales channels and advertising and marketing activities for an unknown period of time until the covid-19 pandemic is contained, or economic activity normalizes. with the current uncertainty in economic activity, the impact on our revenue and our results of operations is likely to continue, the size and duration of which we are currently unable to accurately predict. the extent of the impact of the covid-19 pandemic on our operational and financial performance will depend on a variety of factors, including the duration and spread of covid-19 and its variants, and its impact on our clients, partners, industry, and employees, all of which are uncertain at this time and cannot be accurately predicted. see “item 1a. risk factors” for further discussion of the adverse impacts of the covid-19 pandemic on our business. factors affecting our performance growth in and retention of client spend our recent growth has been driven by expanding our share of spend by our existing clients and adding new clients. our clients include some of the largest advertising agencies in the world, and we believe there is significant room for us to expand further within these clients. as a result, future revenue growth depends upon our ability to retain our existing clients and to gain a larger amount of their advertising spend through our platform. in order to analyze gross spend contributions and growth from existing clients, we measure annual gross spend for the set of clients, or cohort, that commenced spending on our platform in a specific year relative to subsequent periods. the gross spend from each of our cohorts has increased over subsequent periods. however, over time, we will likely lose clients from each cohort, clients may spend less on our platform, and the growth rate of gross spend may change. any such change could have a significant negative impact on gross spend and operating results. ability to expand our omnichannel reach, including ctv and digital radio we enable the purchase of advertising inventory in a wide variety of formats, such as display, mobile, video, audio, social and native. our future growth will depend on our ability to maintain and grow the inventory of, and spend on, other channels in addition to display advertising. we believe that our ability to integrate and offer ctv and digital radio advertising inventory for purchase through our platform and, in particular, our ability to manage the increased costs that will accompany these purchases, will impact the future growth of our business. growth of the programmatic advertising market our operating results and prospects will be impacted by the overall adoption of programmatic advertising by inventory owners and content providers, as well as advertisers and the agencies and service providers that represent them. programmatic advertising has grown rapidly in recent years, and any acceleration or slowing of this growth may affect our operating and financial performance. in addition, even if the programmatic advertising market continues to grow at its current rate, our ability to position ourselves within the market will impact the future growth of our business. development of international markets we have been increasing our focus on markets outside the united states to serve the global needs of our clients. as the middle class grows abroad, we believe that the global opportunity for programmatic advertising is significant and should continue to expand 39 as publishers and advertisers outside the united states seek to adopt the benefits that programmatic advertising provides. to capitalize on this opportunity, we intend to continue investing in our presence internationally. our growth and the success of our initiatives in newer markets will depend on the continued adoption of our platform by our existing clients, as well as new clients, in these markets. information about geographic gross billings is set forth in note 12—segment and geographic information. seasonality in the advertising industry, companies commonly experience seasonal fluctuations in revenue. for example, many advertisers allocate the largest portion of their budgets to the fourth quarter of the calendar year in order to coincide with increased holiday purchasing. historically, the fourth quarter of the year reflects our highest level of advertising activity and the first quarter reflects the lowest level of such activity. we expect our revenue to continue to fluctuate based on seasonal factors that affect the advertising industry as a whole. components of our results of operations we have one primary business activity and operate in one reportable and operating segment. revenue we generate revenue from clients who enter into agreements with us to use our platform to purchase advertising inventory, data and other add-on features. we charge our clients a platform fee, which is generally a percentage of the client’s purchases through the platform. in addition, we invoice our clients for the cost of advertising inventory purchased, plus data and any add-on features purchased through the platform. we report revenue on a net basis, which represents gross billings net of amounts we pay suppliers for the cost of advertising inventory, data and add-on features. accounts receivable is recorded at the amount of gross billings to clients, net of allowances, for the amounts we are responsible to collect, and our accounts payable are recorded at the amount payable to suppliers. accordingly, both accounts receivable and accounts payable appear large in relation to revenue reported on a net basis. revenue as a percentage of gross spend may fluctuate from period to period due to a number of factors, such as changes in the proportion of spend represented by our larger clients with the lowest platform fees, our clients’ use of platform features and volume discounts. we expect that our revenue as a percentage of gross spend will fluctuate in the future, especially as we introduce and as our clients select new platform features, expand our omnichannel capabilities, extend our reach to more ctv inventory and add additional clients whose businesses may have different underlying business models. refer to “critical accounting policies and estimates—revenue recognition” below for a description of our revenue recognition policies. operating expenses we classify our operating expenses into the following four categories and allocate overhead such as information technology infrastructure, rent and occupancy charges based on headcount for these categories: platform operations. platform operations expense consists of expenses related to hosting our platform, which includes “internet traffic” associated with the viewing of available impressions or queries per second (“qps”), and providing support to our clients. platform operations expense includes hosting costs, personnel costs, and amortization of acquired technology and capitalized software costs for the development of our platform. personnel costs include salaries, bonuses, stock-based compensation and employee benefit costs for personnel who support our platform and provide our clients with platform support. we capitalize certain costs associated with the development of our platform, which are amortized in platform operations over their estimated useful lives. we expect platform operations expenses to increase in absolute dollars in future periods as we continue to experience increased volumes of qps through our platform and hire additional personnel to support our clients. sales and marketing. sales and marketing expense consists primarily of personnel costs, including salaries, bonuses, stock-based compensation, employee benefits costs and commission costs, for our sales and marketing personnel. sales and marketing expense also includes costs for market development programs, advertising, promotional and other marketing activities. commissions costs are expensed as incurred. our sales organization focuses on marketing our platform to increase its adoption by existing and new clients. we are also focused on expanding our international business by growing our sales teams in countries in which we currently operate, as well as establishing a presence in additional countries. as a result, we expect sales and marketing expenses to increase in absolute dollars in future periods. sales and marketing expense as a percentage of revenue may fluctuate from period to period based on revenue levels 40 and the timing of our investments in our sales and marketing functions as these investments may vary in scope and scale over periods and are impacted by the revenue seasonality in our industry and business. technology and development. our technology and development expense consists primarily of personnel costs, including salaries, bonuses, stock-based compensation and employee benefits costs, third-party consultant costs associated with the ongoing development of our platform and integrations with our advertising and data inventory suppliers, and amortization of capitalized third-party software used in the development of our platform. technology and development costs are expensed as incurred, except to the extent that such costs are associated with software development that qualifies for capitalization. we amortize capitalized software development costs relating to our platform in platform operations expense which are then recorded as capitalized software development costs included in other assets, non-current on our consolidated balance sheet. we believe that continued investment in our platform is critical to attaining our strategic objectives and long-term growth. therefore, we expect technology and development expense to increase as we continue to invest in the development of our platform to support additional features and functions, increase the number of advertising and data inventory suppliers, and ramp up the volume of advertising spend on our platform. our development efforts also include additional platform functionality to support our international expansion. we also intend to invest in technology to further automate our business processes. general and administrative. our general and administrative expense consists primarily of personnel costs, including salaries, bonuses, stock-based compensation, and employee benefits costs associated with our executive, finance, legal, human resources, compliance, and other administrative personnel, as well as accounting and legal professional services fees, and credit loss expense. we expect to continue to invest in corporate infrastructure to support growth. we expect general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars in future periods. other expense (income), net interest expense. interest expense is mainly related to our debt, which carries a variable interest rate. interest income. interest income is mainly related to our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments, which carry variable interest rates. foreign currency exchange loss, net. foreign currency exchange loss, net consists primarily of gains and losses on foreign currency transactions. we have foreign currency exposure related to our accounts receivable and, to a much lesser extent, accounts payable that are denominated in currencies other than the u.s. dollar, principally the euro, british pound, australian dollar, canadian dollar, japanese yen and indonesian rupiah. provision for (benefit from) income taxes the provision for (benefit from) income taxes consists primarily of u.s. federal, state and foreign income taxes. our income tax provision (benefit) may be significantly affected by changes to our estimates for tax in jurisdictions in which we operate, and other estimates utilized in determining the global effective tax rate. actual results may also differ from our estimates based on changes in economic conditions. such changes could have a substantial impact on the income tax provision. we evaluate the judgments surrounding our estimates and make adjustments, as appropriate, each reporting period. our income tax provision (benefit) may also be affected by the timing of vesting and/or exercise of our stock-based awards. the extent of the impact may be subject to volatility resulting from changes in our stock price and volume of transactions by employees. our effective tax rate differs from the u.s. federal statutory tax rate of 21% primarily due to tax benefits associated with employee exercises of stock options and vesting of restricted stock units, nondeductible stock-based compensation, research and development tax credits, foreign tax rate differences, and state taxes. realization of our deferred tax assets is dependent primarily on the generation of future taxable income. in considering the need for a valuation allowance, we consider our historical, as well as future, projected taxable income along with other objectively verifiable evidence. objectively verifiable evidence includes our realization of tax attributes, assessment of tax credits and utilization of net operating loss carryforwards during the year. 41 results of operations for the year ended december 31, 2021 compared with the year ended december 31, 2020 the following discusses the results of our operations for the year ended december 31, 2021 compared with the year ended december 31, 2020. for a discussion of the results of our operations for the year ended december 31, 2020 compared with the year ended december 31, 2019, see “management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations” in our annual report on form 10-k for the fiscal year ended december 31, 2020, filed with sec on february 18, 2021. references to “notes” are notes to our consolidated financial statements in “item 8. financial statements and supplementary data.” the following tables set forth our consolidated results of operations for the periods presented. for the year ended december 31, 2021 2020 (in thousands) (% of revenue) (in thousands) (% of revenue) revenue $ 1,196,467 100 % $ 836,033 100 % operating expenses: platform operations 221,554 19 178,812 21 sales and marketing 249,298 21 174,742 21 technology and development 226,137 19 166,654 20 general and administrative 374,661 31 171,617 21 total operating expenses 1,071,650 90 691,825 83 income from operations 124,817 10 144,208 17 total other expense, net 2,781 — 305 — income before income taxes 122,036 10 143,903 17 provision for (benefit from) income taxes (15,726 ) (1 ) (98,414 ) (12 ) net income $ 137,762 12 % $ 242,317 29 % ________________ note: percentages may not sum due to rounding. revenue revenue increased by $360.4 million, or 43%, for the year ended december 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended december 31, 2020. the increase was primarily due to a 47% increase in gross spend on our platform, which was driven by increases in the number of advertising campaigns executed per client. revenue as a percentage of gross spend in the aggregate may fluctuate from period to period based on our client mix and the extent to which clients utilize our platform’s features. platform operations platform operations expense increased by $42.7 million, or 24%, for the year ended december 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended december 31, 2020. the increase was primarily due to increases of $17.7 million in personnel costs, which includes $7.1 million in stock-based compensation; $12.2 million in hosting costs; and $10.9 million in facilities costs and allocated overhead. the increase in personnel costs was due to an increase in headcount. the increase in hosting costs was primarily attributable to support related to the increased use of our platform by our clients. the increase in facilities costs was primarily driven by new data center locations and leases for additional office space to support our future growth. we expect platform operations expenses to increase in absolute dollars in future periods as we continue to experience increased volumes of media impressions through our platform and hire additional personnel to support our clients. sales and marketing sales and marketing expense increased by $74.6 million, or 43%, for the year ended december 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended december 31, 2020. the increase was primarily due to increases of $57.5 million in personnel costs, which includes $20.9 million of stock-based compensation; $9.4 million in advertising and marketing costs; and $7.1 million in allocated facilities costs. the increase in personnel costs was primarily due to an increase in headcount in order to support our sales efforts and continue to develop and maintain relationships with our clients, as well as an increase in incentive compensation. the increase in advertising and marketing costs was primarily due to an increase in marketing campaigns and sponsorships. the increase in allocated facilities costs was primarily driven by new leases for additional office space to support our future growth. we expect sales and marketing expenses to increase in absolute dollars in future periods, as we focus on increasing the adoption of our platform with existing and new clients and expanding our international business. 42 technology and development technology and development expense increased by $59.5 million, or 36%, for the year ended december 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended december 31, 2020. the increase was primarily due to increases of $52.4 million in personnel costs, which includes $21.1 million of stock-based compensation, and $6.9 million in allocated facilities costs. the increase in personnel costs was primarily attributable to increased headcount to maintain and support further development of our platform. the increase in allocated facilities costs was primarily driven by new leases for additional office space to support our future growth. we expect technology and development expense to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to invest in the development of our platform to support additional features and functions, increase the number of advertising and data inventory suppliers and support the increase in volume of advertising spending by our clients on our platform. we also intend to invest in technology to further automate our business processes. general and administrative general and administrative expense increased by $203.0 million, or 118%, for the year ended december 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended december 31, 2020. the increase was primarily due to increases of $197.2 million in personnel costs and $6.4 million in allocated facilities costs. the increase in personnel costs was primarily driven by a $176.5 million increase in stock-based compensation costs, which included $157.7 million related to the ceo performance option, and payroll related costs of $20.7 million due to hiring to support our growth. the increase in allocated facilities costs was primarily driven by new leases for additional office space to support our future growth. we expect general and administrative expenses to increase primarily due to an increase in stock-based compensation expense associated with the ceo performance option and continued investment in corporate infrastructure to support growth. for additional information regarding the ceo performance option, refer to note 10— stock-based compensation. other expense, net total other expense, net increased by $2.5 million, or 812%, for the year ended december 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended december 31, 2020. the increase was primarily due to lower interest income on our short-term investments and a net increase in foreign exchange losses. provision for (benefit from) income taxes the difference between the effective tax rate in 2021 of (13)% and the u.s. federal statutory income tax rate of 21% was primarily due to the impact of tax benefits associated with stock-based awards and research and development tax credits, partially offset by nondeductible stock-based compensation and the impact of taxes in foreign jurisdictions. for 2021, the provision for income taxes included $104.4 million of benefits associated with stock-based awards and $18.7 million of research and development tax credits. the difference between the effective tax rate in 2020 of (68)% and the u.s. federal statutory income tax rate of 21% was primarily due to the impact of tax benefits associated with stock-based awards, research and development tax credits and net operating loss carryback from the coronavirus aid, relief, and economic security act (the “cares act”), partially offset by the impact of taxes in foreign jurisdictions. for 2020, the provision for income taxes included $134.6 million of benefits associated with stock-based awards, $20.2 million of research and development tax credits and $17.0 million of benefits associated with net operating loss carryback from the cares act. 43 liquidity and capital resources as of december 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $754.2 million, including $49.7 million held by our international subsidiaries, short-term investments in marketable securities of $204.6 million, working capital of $1,288.3 million and full availability under our $450.0 million credit facility (refer to the “credit facility” section below). for the year ended december 31, 2021, we generated $378.5 million cash flows from operating activities. we believe our existing cash and cash equivalents, cash flow from operations, and our undrawn available balance under our credit facility will be sufficient to meet our working capital requirements for at least the next 12 months. further, in november 2020, we filed a shelf registration statement on form s-3 with the sec (the “shelf registration”), which permits us to issue equity securities and equity-linked securities from time to time, subject to certain limitations. the shelf registration is intended to provide us with additional flexibility to access capital markets for general corporate purposes, subject to market conditions and our capital needs. our future capital requirements and the adequacy of available funds will depend on many factors, including those set forth in “item 1a. risk factors” within this annual report on form 10-k. in the future, we may attempt to raise additional capital through the sale of equity securities or through equity-linked or debt-financing arrangements. if we raise additional funds by issuing equity or equity-linked securities, the ownership of our existing stockholders will be diluted. if we raise additional financing by the incurrence of additional indebtedness, we may be subject to increased fixed payment obligations and could also be subject to additional restrictive covenants, such as limitations on our ability to incur additional debt, and other operating restrictions that could adversely impact our ability to conduct our business. any future indebtedness we incur may result in terms that could be unfavorable to equity investors. there can be no assurances that we will be able to raise additional capital. the inability to raise capital would adversely affect our ability to achieve our business objectives. in addition, if our operating performance during the next 12 months is below our expectations, our liquidity and ability to operate our business could be adversely affected. in light of the recent worldwide covid-19 pandemic we are closely monitoring the effect that current economic conditions may have on our working capital requirements. credit facility on june 15, 2021, we and a syndicate of banks, led by jpmorgan chase bank, n.a., as agent, entered into a loan and security agreement (the “credit facility”). this credit facility replaced our prior credit facility, which was scheduled to terminate in may 2022. the credit facility consists of a $450.0 million revolving loan facility, with a $20.0 million sublimit for swingline borrowings and a $15.0 million sublimit for the issuance of letters of credit. under certain circumstances, we have the right to increase the credit facility by an amount not to exceed $300.0 million. on december 17, 2021, we amended the credit facility to expand the process for issuing letters of credit and the related invoicing, particularly with respect to letters of credit not denominated in u.s. dollars. as of december 31, 2021, we did not have an outstanding debt balance under the credit facility. availability under the credit facility was $443.9 million as of december 31, 2021, which is net of outstanding letters of credit of $6.1 million. the credit facility matures, and all outstanding amounts become due and payable, on june 15, 2026. as of december 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all covenants. for additional information regarding the credit facility, refer to note 7—debt. cash flows the following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented (in thousands): year ended december 31, 2021 2020 cash flows provided by operating activities $ 378,513 $ 405,069 cash flows used in investing activities $ (93,638 ) $ (143,271 ) cash flows provided by financing activities $ 31,926 $ 44,679 operating activities our cash flows from operating activities are primarily influenced by growth in our operations, increases or decreases in collections from our clients and related payments to our suppliers for advertising inventory and data. we typically pay suppliers in advance of collections from our clients. our collection and payment cycles can vary from period to period. in addition, we expect seasonality to impact cash flows from operating activities on a sequential quarterly basis during the year. 44 in 2021, cash provided by operating activities of $378.5 million resulted primarily from net income adjusted for non-cash items of $548.2 million and a net decrease in our operating assets and liabilities of $169.7 million. the net decrease was primarily due to increase in accounts receivable of $444.3 million, and a $44.0 million decrease in operating lease liabilities, partially offset by a $309.4 million increase in accounts payable. the increase in accounts receivable resulted primarily from the growth of our business and the timing of cash receipts from clients. the decrease in operating lease liabilities was due primarily to rent payments. the increase in accounts payable was due to the growth of our business and the timing of payments to suppliers for the cost of advertising inventory, data and add-on features. in 2020, cash provided by operating activities of $405.1 million resulted primarily from net income adjusted for noncash items of $390.1 million and a net increase in our operating assets and liabilities of $15.0 million. the net increase was primarily related to a $418.1 million increase in accounts receivable, $66.7 million increase in prepaid expenses and other assets, partially offset by a $481.3 million increase in accounts payable. the increase in accounts receivable resulted primarily from the growth in our business and the timing of cash receipts from clients. the increase in prepaid expenses and other assets was attributable to an increase in the income tax receivable primarily related to the tax benefits associated with employee exercises of stock options, vesting of restricted stock units and refunds due from the taxing authorities relating to net operating loss carrybacks. the increase in accounts payable was primarily due to the growth of our business which results in an increase in payables to suppliers for the cost of advertising inventory, data and add-on features. investing activities our primary investing activities consist of investing in short-term investments in marketable securities, purchases of property and equipment to support of our growth, and capital expenditures to develop our software to enhance our technology platform. as our business grows, we expect our capital expenditures and our investment activity to continue to increase. in 2021, we used $93.6 million of cash in investing activities, consisting of $278.4 million to purchase short-term investments, $54.8 million to purchase property and equipment, $13.3 million for certain assets accounted for as a business acquisition and $5.2 million of investments in capitalized software, partially offset by maturities of short-term investments of $253.4 million and sales of investments of $4.5 million. in 2020, we used $143.3 million of cash in investing activities, consisting of $230.8 million to purchase short-term investments, $74.1 million to purchase property and equipment and $6.1 million of investments in capitalized software, partially offset by maturities of short-term investments of $167.6 million. financing activities our financing activities consisted primarily of borrowings and repayments of our debt, proceeds from our equity compensation plans and taxes paid to net settle restricted stock awards. in 2021, cash provided by financing activities of $31.9 million was primarily due to $61.5 million proceeds from stock option exercises and $29.2 million proceeds from the employee stock purchase plan, partially offset by $56.9 million of taxes paid for restricted stock award settlements and $1.9 million paid for debt financing costs. in 2020, cash provided by financing activities of $44.7 million was primarily due to $76.1 million proceeds from stock option exercises and $21.7 million proceeds from the employee stock purchase plan, partially offset by $53.1 million of taxes paid for restricted stock award settlements. contractual obligations and known future cash requirements our principal commitments consist of non-cancelable operating leases for our various office facilities, and other contractual commitments consisting of obligations to our hosting services providers, marketing contracts and providers of software as a service. in certain cases, the terms of the lease agreements provide for rental payments on a graduated basis. the following table summarizes our non-cancellable contractual obligations at december 31, 2021 (in thousands): payments due by period less than one year one year or more total operating lease obligations $ 53,990 $ 264,471 $ 318,461 other contractual commitments 60,833 39,679 100,512 total $ 114,823 $ 304,150 $ 418,973 45 as of december 31, 2021, our total amount of gross unrecognized tax benefits was $86.3 million before netting with deferred tax assets for tax credit carryforwards and is considered a long-term obligation. due to their nature, there is a high degree of uncertainty regarding the time of future cash outflows and other events that extinguish these liabilities. in the ordinary course of business, we enter into agreements in which we may agree to indemnify clients, suppliers, vendors, lessors, business partners, lenders, stockholders and other parties with respect to certain matters, including losses resulting from claims of intellectual property infringement, damages to property or persons, business losses, or other liabilities. generally, these indemnity and defense obligations relate to our own business operations, obligations, and acts or omissions. however, under some circumstances, we agree to indemnify and defend contract counterparties against losses resulting from their own business operations, obligations, and acts or omissions, or the business operations, obligations, and acts or omissions of third parties. these indemnity provisions generally survive termination or expiration of the agreements in which they appear. in addition, we have entered into indemnification agreements with our directors, executive officers and other officers that will require us to indemnify them against liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service as directors, officers or employees. in the ordinary course of business, demands have been made upon us to provide indemnification under such agreements, but we are not aware of any claims that could have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements. accordingly, no amounts for any obligation have been recorded at december 31, 2021. critical accounting policies and estimates our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the united states of america (“gaap”). the preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and related disclosures. we evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. our estimates are based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. actual results could differ from these estimates. we believe that the assumptions and estimates associated with the evaluation of revenue recognition criteria, including the determination of revenue recognition as net versus gross in our revenue arrangements, stock-based compensation expense and income taxes have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements. therefore, we consider these to be our critical accounting policies and estimates. revenue recognition we generate revenue from clients who enter into agreements with us to use our platform to purchase advertising inventory, data and other add-on features. we charge our clients a platform fee, which is generally a percentage of the client’s purchases through the platform. in addition, we invoice our clients for the cost of advertising inventory purchased, plus data and any add-on features purchased through the platform. we report revenue net of amounts we pay suppliers for the cost of advertising inventory, third-party data and other add-on features (collectively, “supplier features”). judgment is required to determine whether we are the principal and report revenue on a gross basis for supplier features or the agent and report revenue on a net basis for the amount of platform fees charged to the client. in this assessment, we consider if we obtain control of the specified service before it is transferred to the client, as well as other indicators such as the party primarily responsible for fulfillment, inventory risk, and discretion in establishing price. for additional information regarding revenue and the assumptions used for determining our revenue recognition refer to note 2—basis of presentation and summary of significant accounting policies. stock-based compensation stock-based compensation expense related to stock options, restricted stock awards and units (collectively, “restricted stock”), and awards granted under our employee stock purchase plan (“espp”) is measured and recognized in our consolidated financial statements based on the fair value of the awards granted. in october 2021, we granted a market-based performance award to our chief executive officer (the “ceo performance option”) under the 2016 incentive award plan. the fair values of our espp and stock option awards are estimated on the grant date using the black-scholes option-pricing model, except for the ceo performance option that is estimated using the monte carlo valuation model. the fair value of restricted stock is calculated using the closing market price of our common stock on the date of grant. stock-based compensation expense related to stock options and restricted stock is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service periods of the awards, which is generally four years. stock-based compensation for the ceo performance option is recognized on a graded-vesting basis over a period of approximately five years but may be accelerated if the vesting criteria is met prior to the estimated performance period. stock-based compensation expense for espp awards is recognized on a graded-vesting attribution basis over the requisite service period of each award. 46 for additional information regarding stock-based compensation and the assumptions used for determining the fair value of stock options and espp awards, refer to note 2—basis of presentation and summary of significant accounting policies and note 10—stock-based compensation. income taxes our income tax provision may be significantly affected by changes to our estimates for tax in jurisdictions in which we operate and other estimates utilized in determining the global effective tax rate. actual results may also differ from our estimate based on changes in economic conditions. such changes could have a substantial impact on the income tax provision and deferred income tax assets and liabilities. we evaluate the judgments surrounding our estimates and make adjustments, as appropriate, each reporting period. for additional information regarding income taxes and the assumptions used for determining our income tax provision, as well as our related deferred income tax assets and liabilities, refer to note 2—basis of presentation and summary of significant accounting policies and note 11—income taxes. recently issued accounting pronouncements for information regarding recent accounting pronouncements, refer to note 2—basis of presentation and summary of significant accounting policies.