table of contents item 7. management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations the following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this report. the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, and beliefs. our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this report, particularly in “risk factors” included in part i, item 1a of this report. the following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations covers fiscal 2024 and 2023 items and year-over-year comparisons between fiscal 2024 and 2023. discussions of fiscal 2022 items and year-over-year comparisons between fiscal 2023 and 2022 that are not included in this form 10-k can be found in “management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations” in part ii, item 7 of our annual report on form 10-k for the fiscal year ended january 31, 2023, that was filed with the sec on february 27, 2023. overview workday delivers applications for financial management, spend management, human capital management, planning, and analytics. with workday, our customers have a unified system that can help them plan, execute, analyze, and extend to other applications and environments, thereby helping them continuously adapt how they manage their business and operations. our diverse customer base includes medium-sized and large, global organizations within numerous industry categories, including professional and business services, financial services, healthcare, education, government, technology, media, retail, and hospitality. we have achieved significant growth since our inception in 2005. our current financial focus is on growing our revenues, operating margin, and operating cash flows, and expanding both our customer base and our footprint within our existing customers. while we have a history of gaap operating losses prior to fiscal 2024, we strive to invest in a disciplined manner across all of our functional areas to sustain continued near-term revenue growth and support our long-term initiatives. we expect our product development, sales and marketing, and general and administrative expenses as a percentage of total revenues will decrease over the longer term as we grow our revenues, and we anticipate that we will gain economies of scale by increasing our customer base without direct incremental development costs. we plan to reinvest a significant portion of our incremental revenues in future periods to grow our business. we have invested and expect to continue to invest heavily in our product development efforts to deliver additional compelling applications, enhance existing applications, and to address customers’ evolving needs. in addition, we plan to continue to expand our ability to sell our applications globally, particularly in europe and the asia-pacific region, by investing in product development and customer support to address the business needs of targeted local markets, increasing our sales organization and marketing programs, acquiring and leasing additional office space, and expanding our ecosystem of partners. we expect to make further significant investments in our data center capacity and equipment and third-party hosted infrastructure platforms as we plan for future growth. we are also investing in personnel to support our growing customer base. we regularly evaluate acquisition and investment opportunities in complementary businesses, employee teams, services, technologies, and intellectual property rights in an effort to expand our product and service offerings, and expect to continue making acquisitions and investments in the future. while we remain focused on improving our operating margin, these acquisitions and investments may increase our costs on an absolute basis in the near term. many of these investments will occur in advance of experiencing any direct benefit from them and could make it difficult to determine if we are allocating our resources efficiently. since inception, we have also invested heavily in our professional services organization to help ensure that customers successfully deploy and adopt our applications. additionally, we continue to expand our professional services partner ecosystem to further support our customers. we believe our investment in professional services, as well as partners building consulting practices around workday and helping to deliver additional innovation and solutions, will drive additional customer subscriptions and continued growth in revenues. as we continue to leverage our expanding partner ecosystem, we expect that professional services revenue will continue to decline over time as a percentage of total revenues. impact of current economic conditions recent macroeconomic events including higher inflation and interest rates, as well as geopolitical factors including the russia-ukraine and israel-hamas conflicts, have negatively impacted the global economy and created continued uncertainty, volatility, and disruption of financial markets. despite this, we are confident in the long-term overall health of our business, the strength of our product offerings, and our ability to continue to execute on our strategy and help our customers on their human capital and finance digital transformation journeys. demand for our products remains strong, we continue to achieve solid new subscription bookings, and our near-term revenues are relatively predictable as a result of our subscription-based business model. we have experienced, and may continue to experience, the lengthening of certain sales cycles and moderation of revenue growth rates, particularly within net new opportunities, and have provided certain customers with more flexible payment terms. if the economic uncertainty continues, we may also experience a negative impact on customer renewals, customer collections, sales and marketing efforts, customer deployments, product development, or other financial metrics. any of these factors could harm our business, financial condition, and operating results. for further discussion of the potential impacts of recent macroeconomic events on our business, financial condition, and operating results, see “risk factors” included in part i, item 1a of this report. financial results overview the following table provides an overview of our key metrics (in millions, except percentages, basis points, and headcount data): as of and for the years ended january 31, 20242023change total revenues$7,259 $6,216 17 % subscription services revenues$6,603 $5,567 19 % gaap operating income (loss)$183 $(222)182 % non-gaap operating income (1) $1,740 $1,210 44 % gaap operating margin2.5 %(3.6)%610 bps non-gaap operating margin (1) 24.0 %19.5 %450 bps operating cash flows$2,149 $1,657 30 % free cash flows (1) $1,917 $1,293 48 % total subscription revenue backlog$20,924 $16,448 27 % 12-month subscription revenue backlog$6,623 $5,512 20 % 24-month subscription revenue backlog $11,656 $9,677 20 % cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities$7,813 $6,121 28 % headcount18,824 17,744 6 % (1)see “non-gaap financial measures” below for further information. components of results of operations revenues we derive our revenues from subscription services and professional services. subscription services revenues primarily consist of fees that give our customers access to our cloud applications, which include related customer support. professional services revenues include fees for deployment services, optimization services, and training. subscription services revenues accounted for approximately 91% of our total revenues during fiscal 2024, and represented 97% of our total unearned revenue as of january 31, 2024. subscription services revenues are driven primarily by the number of customers, the number of workers at each customer, the specific applications subscribed to by each customer, and the price of our applications. the mix of applications to which each customer subscribes can affect our financial performance due to price differentials in our applications. pricing for our applications varies based on many factors, including the complexity and maturity of the application and its acceptance in the marketplace. new products or services offerings by competitors in the future could also impact the mix and pricing of our offerings. subscription services revenues are recognized over time as services are delivered and consumed concurrently over the contractual term, beginning on the date our service is made available to the customer. our subscription contracts typically have a term of three years or longer and are generally noncancelable. we generally invoice our customers annually in advance for subscription services. we may provide certain customers flexible payment terms and the timing of revenue recognition may differ from the timing of invoicing to our customers. our professional services consulting engagements are billed on a time and materials basis or a fixed price basis. we generally invoice our customers in arrears for our professional services. for contracts billed on a time and materials basis, revenues are recognized over time as the professional services are performed. for contracts billed on a fixed price basis, revenues are recognized over time based on the proportion of the professional services performed. in some cases, we supplement our consulting teams by subcontracting resources from our service partners and deploying them on customer engagements. as the workday-related consulting practices of our partner firms continue to develop, we expect these partners to increasingly contract directly with our subscription customers for services engagements. subscription revenue backlog our subscription revenue backlog, which is also referred to as remaining performance obligations for subscription contracts, represents contracted subscription services revenues that have not yet been recognized and includes billed and unbilled amounts. subscription revenue backlog may fluctuate from period to period due to a number of factors, including the timing of renewals and overall renewal rates, new business growth, average contract duration, and seasonality. costs and expenses costs of subscription services revenues. costs of subscription services revenues consist primarily of expenses associated with hosting our applications and providing customer support, including employee-related expenses, expenses related to data center capacity and computing infrastructure operated by third parties, and depreciation of our data center equipment. costs of professional services revenues. costs of professional services revenues consist primarily of employee-related expenses associated with these services, subcontractor expenses, and travel expenses. product development expenses. product development expenses consist primarily of employee-related expenses associated with our efforts to add new features and applications, increase functionality, and enhance the ease of use of our cloud applications. sales and marketing expenses. sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of employee-related expenses, sales commissions, marketing programs, and travel expenses. marketing programs consist of advertising, events, corporate communications, brand awareness, brand ambassador campaigns, and product marketing activities. sales commissions are considered incremental costs of obtaining a contract with a customer. sales commissions for new revenue contracts are capitalized and amortized on a straight-line basis over a period of benefit that we have determined to be five years. general and administrative expenses. general and administrative expenses consist of employee-related expenses for finance and accounting, legal, human resources, information systems personnel, professional fees, and other corporate expenses. results of operations revenues our total revenues for fiscal 2024, 2023, and 2022, were as follows (in millions): year ended january 31, 202420232022 subscription services$6,603 $5,567 $4,546 professional services656 649 593 total revenues$7,259 $6,216 $5,139 total revenues were $7.3 billion for fiscal 2024, compared to $6.2 billion for fiscal 2023, an increase of $1.0 billion, or 17%. subscription services revenues were $6.6 billion for fiscal 2024, compared to $5.6 billion for fiscal 2023, an increase of $1.0 billion, or 19%. the increase in subscription services revenues was primarily due to an increased number of new customers, expansion of our product offerings sold to existing customers, and strong customer renewals, with gross and net retention rates over 95% and over 100%, respectively. professional services revenues were $656 million for fiscal 2024, compared to $649 million for fiscal 2023, an increase of $7 million, or 1%. professional services revenues remained relatively consistent as we continued to leverage our service partners to contract directly with our subscription customers for services engagements. subscription revenue backlog as of january 31, 2024, our total subscription revenue backlog was $20.9 billion, with $6.6 billion and $11.7 billion expected to be recognized in revenues over the next 12 and 24 months, respectively. as of january 31, 2023, our total subscription revenue backlog was $16.4 billion, with $5.5 billion and $9.7 billion expected to be recognized in revenues over the next 12 and 24 months, respectively. the increase in subscription revenue backlog was primarily driven by an increased number of new customers, timing of renewals for existing customers, expansion of our product offerings provided to existing customers, and longer duration of customer contracts. costs and expenses our costs and expenses for fiscal 2024, 2023, and 2022, were as follows (in millions): year ended january 31, 202420232022 costs of subscription services$1,031 $1,011 $796 costs of professional services740 704 632 product development2,464 2,271 1,879 sales and marketing2,139 1,848 1,462 general and administrative702 604 486 total costs and expenses$7,076 $6,438 $5,255 total costs and expenses were $7.1 billion for fiscal 2024, compared to $6.4 billion for fiscal 2023, an increase of $638 million, or 10%. the increase in total costs and expenses was primarily due to an increase of $516 million in employee-related expenses, including share-based compensation. the increase in employee-related expenses was mainly driven by higher headcount, partially offset by a $40 million impact from a workforce realignment that occurred in fiscal 2023 and a $28 million impact from a change in the vesting dates of all unvested restricted stock units (“rsu”) from the 15th to the 5th of each month (“vest date change”) in fiscal 2023. additional increases in total costs and expenses included $66 million in third-party expenses for hardware maintenance and data center capacity, $56 million in facilities and it-related expenses, $54 million related to marketing programs, and $38 million in travel expenses, offset by a decrease of $93 million in depreciation expense due to a change in the estimated useful lives of our data center equipment from 3 years to 5 years, effective beginning fiscal 2024 (“change in useful lives of data center equipment”). costs of subscription services costs of subscription services were $1.0 billion for fiscal 2024, compared to $1.0 billion for fiscal 2023, an increase of $20 million, or 2%. the increase in costs of subscription services included increases of $62 million in employee-related expenses, including share-based compensation, primarily due to higher average headcount, $44 million in third-party expenses for hardware maintenance and data center capacity, and $16 million in facilities and it-related expenses, offset by a decrease of $89 million in depreciation expense due to the change in useful lives of data center equipment. we expect costs of subscription services will continue to increase in absolute dollars as we improve and expand our technical operations infrastructure, including our data centers and computing infrastructure operated by third parties. costs of professional services costs of professional services were $740 million for fiscal 2024, compared to $704 million for fiscal 2023, an increase of $36 million, or 5%. the increase in costs of professional services included an increase of $38 million in employee-related expenses, including share-based compensation, primarily due to higher average headcount. we expect costs of professional services as a percentage of total revenues to continue to decline as we continue to rely on our service partners to deploy our applications and as our subscription services revenues continue to grow as we expand both our customer base and our footprint within our existing customers. product development product development expenses were $2.5 billion for fiscal 2024, compared to $2.3 billion for fiscal 2023, an increase of $193 million, or 8%. the increase in product development expenses included increases of $148 million in employee-related expenses, including share-based compensation, primarily due to higher average headcount, $22 million in third-party expenses for hardware maintenance and data center capacity, and $15 million in facilities and it-related expenses. we expect product development expenses will continue to increase in absolute dollars as we improve and extend our applications and develop new technologies. sales and marketing sales and marketing expenses were $2.1 billion for fiscal 2024, compared to $1.8 billion for fiscal 2023, an increase of $291 million, or 16%. the increase in sales and marketing expenses included increases of $191 million in employee-related expenses, including share-based compensation, primarily due to higher average headcount, $51 million related to marketing programs, $21 million in facilities and it-related expenses, and $21 million in travel expenses. we expect sales and marketing expenses to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to invest in our domestic and international selling and marketing activities to expand awareness of our brand and product offerings to attract new and existing customers. general and administrative general and administrative expenses were $702 million for fiscal 2024, compared to $604 million for fiscal 2023, an increase of $98 million, or 16%. the increase in general and administrative expenses included increases of $77 million in employee-related expenses, including share-based compensation, primarily due to higher average headcount and $11 million in travel expenses. we expect general and administrative expenses will continue to increase in absolute dollars as we invest in our general and administrative organizations to support business growth. share-based compensation costs and expenses include share-based compensation expenses as follows (in millions): year ended january 31, 202420232022 costs of subscription services$120 $106 $86 costs of professional services116 111 113 product development653 619 543 sales and marketing282 249 216 general and administrative245 210 154 total share-based compensation expenses$1,416 $1,295 $1,112 percentage of total revenues 19.5 %20.8 %21.6 % share-based compensation expenses increased by $121 million during fiscal 2024, primarily due to additional grants to new and existing employees, partially offset by the $28 million impact of the vest date change in fiscal 2023. share-based compensation expenses increased by $183 million during fiscal 2023, primarily due to additional grants to new and existing employees, and an acceleration of $28 million of expense related to the vest date change in fiscal 2023. equity compensation is an important element of our compensation philosophy. while we expect share-based compensation expense to grow in absolute dollars as we expand our global workforce, we expect it to continue to decline as a percentage of total revenues. operating income (loss) and operating margin gaap operating income (loss) increased from $(222) million, or (3.6)% of revenues, in fiscal 2023 to $183 million, or 2.5% of revenues, in fiscal 2024, primarily due to our revenue growth outpacing headcount growth and moderation of operating expenses. this improvement also included a $93 million, or 1.3% of revenues, benefit from the change in useful lives of data center equipment. non-gaap operating income increased from $1.2 billion, or 19.5% of revenues, in fiscal 2023 to $1.7 billion, or 24.0% of revenues in fiscal 2024, primarily due to our revenue growth outpacing headcount growth and moderation of operating expenses. this improvement also included a $93 million, or 1.3% of revenues, benefit from the change in useful lives of data center equipment. reconciliations of our gaap to non-gaap operating income (loss) and operating margin were as follows (in millions, except percentages). see “non-gaap financial measures” below for further information. year ended january 31, 2024 gaapshare-based compensation expensesemployer payroll tax-related items on employee stock transactions amortization of acquisition-related intangible assets non-gaap operating income (loss)$183 $1,416 $66 $75 $1,740 operating margin2.5 %19.5 %0.9 %1.1 %24.0 % year ended january 31, 2023 gaapshare-based compensation expensesemployer payroll tax-related items on employee stock transactions amortization of acquisition-related intangible assets non-gaap operating income (loss)$(222)$1,295 $52 $85 $1,210 operating margin(3.6)%20.8 %0.9 %1.4 %19.5 % year ended january 31, 2022 gaapshare-based compensation expensesemployer payroll tax-related items on employee stock transactions amortization of acquisition-related intangible assets non-gaap (2) operating income (loss)$(116)$1,112 $76 $78 $1,150 operating margin(2.3)%21.6 %1.6 %1.5 %22.4 % other income (expense), net other income (expense), net consisted of the following (in millions): year ended january 31, 202420232022 total other income (expense), net$173 $(38)$132 other income, net in fiscal 2024 was primarily due to interest income of $296 million on our marketable debt securities from higher investment balances and rising interest rates, offset by interest expense of $114 million related to our senior notes and net losses of $24 million on our equity investments. other expense, net in fiscal 2023 was primarily due to interest expense of $102 million on our debt primarily related to the senior notes and losses of $27 million on our equity investments. expenses were offset by interest income of $98 million on our marketable securities from higher investment balances and rising interest rates. provision for (benefit from) income taxes the provision for (benefit from) income taxes consisted of the following (in millions): year ended january 31, 202420232022 provision for (benefit from) income taxes$(1,025)$107 $(13) the income tax benefit for fiscal 2024 was primarily attributable to the $1.1 billion release of our valuation allowance related to all u.s. federal and state deferred tax assets, excluding certain state tax credits. for further information, see note 17, income taxes, of the notes to consolidated financial statements included in part ii, item 8 of this report. the income tax expense for fiscal 2023 was primarily attributable to a taxable gain recognized from integrating intellectual property, income tax expenses in profitable foreign jurisdictions, and an increase in state taxes due to capitalized research and development expenditures. the income tax benefit for fiscal 2022 was primarily attributable to excess tax benefit from stock option deductions in foreign jurisdictions, reversal of previously accrued tax liabilities upon favorable tax audit results, and amortization of intangibles from business combinations. the organization for economic cooperation and development (“oecd”) released pillar two model rules defining a 15% global minimum tax for large multinational corporations. the oecd continues to release additional guidance and countries are implementing legislation with widespread adoption of the pillar two framework expected in the near future. we are in the process of evaluating the potential impacts of pillar two. while we do not currently expect pillar two to have a material impact on our effective tax rate, our analysis is ongoing and incomplete, and it is possible that pillar two could have a material adverse effect on our tax liability. liquidity and capital resources as of january 31, 2024, our principal sources of liquidity were cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities totaling $7.8 billion, which were primarily held for working capital purposes. our cash equivalents and marketable securities are composed of, in order from largest to smallest, corporate bonds, u.s. treasury securities, commercial paper, money market funds, and u.s. agency obligations. we have financed our operations primarily through customer payments, issuance of debt, and sales of our common stock. we believe our existing cash, cash equivalents, marketable securities, cash provided by operating activities, unbilled amounts related to the remaining term of contracted noncancelable subscription agreements, which are not reflected on the consolidated balance sheets, and, if necessary, our borrowing capacity under our 2022 credit agreement that provides for $1.0 billion of unsecured financing, are sufficient to meet our working capital, capital expenditure, and debt repayment needs over the next 12 months and beyond. our long-term future capital requirements depend on many factors, including the effects of macroeconomic trends, customer growth rates, subscription renewal activity, headcount growth, the timing and extent of development efforts, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, the introduction of new and enhanced services offerings, the timing and costs associated with the construction or acquisition of additional facilities, and our investment and acquisition activities. as part of our strategy, we may choose to seek additional debt or equity financing. our cash flows for fiscal 2024, 2023, and 2022 were as follows (in millions): year ended january 31, 202420232022 net cash provided by (used in): operating activities$2,149 $1,657 $1,651 investing activities(1,751)(2,506)(1,607) financing activities(268)1,204 110 effect of exchange rate changes(1)(1)(1) net increase (decrease) in cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash$129 $354 $153 operating activities cash provided by operating activities was $2.1 billion and $1.7 billion for fiscal 2024 and 2023, respectively. in fiscal 2024, the improvement in cash flow provided by operating activities was primarily due to an increase in sales and the related billings, strong cash collections, interest received from marketable debt securities, and a one-time intellectual property transfer tax payment made in fiscal 2023. the improvement was offset by higher cash operating expenses, including payouts under our new performance-based cash bonus program, an interest payment on our senior notes that did not occur in the prior fiscal year due to the timing of our debt offering, and payments related to the workforce realignment announced in fiscal 2023. investing activities cash used in investing activities for fiscal 2024 was $1.8 billion, which primarily resulted from a cash outflow of $1.6 billion from the timing of purchases and maturities of marketable securities and total capital expenditures of $232 million for data center and office space projects, offset by proceeds of $144 million from sales of marketable securities. cash used in investing activities for fiscal 2023 was $2.5 billion, which primarily resulted from purchases of marketable securities, net of maturities, of $2.2 billion using the proceeds from the senior notes offering, total capital expenditures of $364 million for data center and office space projects, and purchases of $23 million for non-marketable equity and other investments. these payments were partially offset by proceeds of $116 million from sales of marketable and non-marketable securities. we expect capital expenditures will be approximately $330 million in fiscal 2025. this includes investments in our customer data centers, office facilities, and corporate it infrastructure to support our continued growth. financing activities for fiscal 2024, cash used by financing activities was $268 million, which was due to $423 million of repurchases of common stock under the 2022 share repurchase program, offset by proceeds of $155 million from the issuance of common stock from employee equity plans. for fiscal 2023, cash provided by financing activities was $1.2 billion, which was primarily due to proceeds of $3.0 billion from borrowings on the senior notes, net of debt discount of $22 million, and $152 million from the issuance of common stock from employee equity plans, offset by the principal payment of $1.15 billion in connection with the conversion of our 0.25% convertible senior notes (“2022 notes”), repayment of $694 million for the term loan under the credit agreement entered into in april 2020 (“2020 credit agreement”), and $75 million of repurchases of common stock under the 2022 share repurchase program. beginning in april 2024, we intend to fund withholding taxes due on employee equity awards by net share withholding, rather than our current approach of selling shares of our common stock on our employees’ behalf to cover taxes upon vesting of such awards. we expect this net share withholding approach will increase our financing cash outflows and reduce the number of shares that will be issued in connection with the vesting of our employee equity awards. free cash flows in evaluating our performance internally, we focus on long-term, sustainable growth in free cash flows. we define free cash flows, a non-gaap financial measure, as net cash provided by (used in) operating activities minus total capital expenditures. see “non-gaap financial measures” below for further information. free cash flows improved to $1.9 billion for fiscal 2024, compared to $1.3 billion for fiscal 2023. the improvement was primarily due to increases in sales and the related billings, strong cash collections, interest received from marketable debt securities, a one-time intellectual property transfer tax payment made in fiscal 2023, and a reduction in capital expenditures for data center and office space projects. the improvement was offset by higher cash operating expenses, including payouts under our new performance-based cash bonus program, an interest payment on our senior notes that did not occur in the prior fiscal year due to the timing of our debt offering, and payments related to the workforce realignment announced in fiscal 2023. reconciliation of our gaap net cash provided by (used in) operating activities to non-gaap free cash flows is as follows (in millions): year ended january 31, 202420232022 net cash provided by (used in) operating activities$2,149 $1,657 $1,651 less: total capital expenditures (1) (232)(364)(435) free cash flows $1,917 $1,293 $1,216 (1)total capital expenditures consists of capital expenditures, excluding owned real estate projects of $228 million, $360 million, and $264 million for fiscal 2024, 2023, and 2022, respectively, and owned real estate projects of $4 million, $4 million, and $171 million for fiscal 2024, 2023, and 2022, respectively. share repurchase programs in november 2022, our board of directors authorized the 2022 share repurchase program, under which we may repurchase up to $500 million of our outstanding shares of class a common stock. the 2022 share repurchase program has a term of 18 months, may be suspended or discontinued at any time, and does not obligate us to acquire any amount of class a common stock. for further information, see note 14, stockholders’ equity, of the notes to consolidated financial statements included in part ii, item 8 of this report. in february 2024, our board of directors authorized the 2024 share repurchase program, under which we may repurchase up to an additional $500 million of our outstanding shares of class a common stock. for further information, see note 21, subsequent events, of the notes to consolidated financial statements included in part ii, item 8 of this report. contractual obligations our contractual obligations primarily consist of borrowings under our senior notes, agreements for third-party hosted infrastructure platforms for business operations, leases for office space and co-location facilities for data center capacity, and other purchase obligations entered into in the ordinary course of business. the table below includes our material contractual obligations, excluding imputed interest, as of january 31, 2024 (in millions). for further information, see the associated notes to consolidated financial statements included in part ii, item 8 of this report referenced in the table below. payments due by period totalshort-termlong-termreference senior notes (1) $3,679 $110 $3,569 note 11 third-party hosted infrastructure platform obligations1,857 180 1,677 note 13 operating leases359 100 259 note 12 other purchase obligations463 120 343 note 13 $6,358 $510 $5,848 (1)consists of principal and interest payments on the senior notes. non-gaap financial measures regulation s-k item 10(e), “use of non-gaap financial measures in commission filings,” defines and prescribes the conditions for use of non-gaap financial information. our measures of non-gaap operating income, non-gaap operating margin, and free cash flows meet the definition of non-gaap financial measures. non-gaap operating income and non-gaap operating margin we use the non-gaap financial measures of non-gaap operating income and non-gaap operating margin to understand and compare operating results across accounting periods, for internal budgeting and forecasting purposes, for short- and long-term operating plans, and to evaluate our financial performance. we believe that these non-gaap financial measures reflect our ongoing business in a manner that allows for meaningful period-to-period comparisons and analysis of trends in our business. our non-gaap operating income and non-gaap operating margin exclude the components listed below. for the reasons set forth below, we believe that excluding these components provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results and prospects in the same manner as management, in comparing financial results across accounting periods and to those of peer companies, and to better understand the long-term performance of our core business. •share-based compensation expenses. although share-based compensation is an important aspect of the compensation of our employees and executives, we believe it is useful to exclude share-based compensation expenses to better understand the long-term performance of our core business and to facilitate comparison of our results to those of peer companies. share-based compensation expenses are determined using a number of factors, including our stock price, volatility, and forfeiture rates, that are beyond our control and generally unrelated to operational decisions and performance in any particular period. further, share-based compensation expenses are not reflective of the value ultimately received by the grant recipients. •employer payroll tax-related items on employee stock transactions. we exclude the employer payroll tax-related items on employee stock transactions in order to show the full effect that excluding share-based compensation expenses has on our operating results. similar to share-based compensation expenses, this tax expense is dependent on our stock price and other factors that are beyond our control and do not correlate to the operation of the business. •amortization of acquisition-related intangible assets. for business combinations, we generally allocate a portion of the purchase price to intangible assets. the amount of the allocation is based on estimates and assumptions made by management and is subject to amortization. the amount of purchase price allocated to intangible assets and the term of its related amortization can vary significantly and are unique to each acquisition and thus we do not believe it is reflective of ongoing operations. although we exclude the amortization of acquisition-related intangible assets from these non-gaap financial measures, we believe that it is important for investors to understand that such intangible assets were recorded as part of purchase accounting and contribute to revenue generation. free cash flows we define free cash flows as net cash provided by (used in) operating activities minus total capital expenditures. we use free cash flows as a measure of financial progress in our business, as it balances operating results, cash management, and capital efficiency. we believe information regarding free cash flows provides investors and others with an enhanced view of cash flow generation from the ongoing operations of our business. limitations on the use of non-gaap financial measures a limitation of our non-gaap financial measures of non-gaap operating income, non-gaap operating margin, and free cash flows is that they do not have uniform definitions. our definitions will likely differ from the definitions used by other companies, including peer companies, and therefore comparability may be limited. further, the non-gaap financial measures of non-gaap operating income, non-gaap operating margin, and free cash flows have certain limitations as they do not reflect all items of expense or cash that affect our operations and are reflected in the corresponding gaap financial measures. in the case of share-based compensation, if we did not pay out a portion of compensation in the form of share-based compensation, the cash salary expense included in operating expenses would be higher, which would affect our cash position. we compensate for these limitations by reconciling the non-gaap financial measures to the most comparable gaap financial measures. these non-gaap financial measures should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for or in isolation from, measures prepared in accordance with gaap. we encourage investors and others to review our financial information in its entirety, not to rely on any single financial measure, and to view our non-gaap financial measures in conjunction with the most comparable gaap financial measures. see “results of operations—operating income (loss) and operating margin” for reconciliations from the most directly comparable gaap financial measures of gaap operating income (loss) and gaap operating margin, to the non-gaap financial measures of non-gaap operating income and non-gaap operating margin, for fiscal 2024, 2023, and 2022. see “liquidity and capital resources—free cash flows” for a reconciliation from the most comparable gaap financial measure, net cash provided by (used in) operating activities, to the non-gaap financial measure, free cash flows, for fiscal 2024, 2023, and 2022. critical accounting policies and estimates our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with gaap. the preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates, judgments, and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. on an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, judgments, and assumptions. our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. we believe that of our significant accounting policies, which are described in note 2, accounting standards and significant accounting policies, of the notes to consolidated financial statements included in part ii, item 8 of this report, the following accounting policies and specific estimates involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity. accordingly, these are the policies and estimates we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our consolidated financial condition and operating results. revenue recognition we derive our revenues from subscription services and professional services. revenues are recognized when control of these services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to receive in exchange for services rendered. we determine revenue recognition through the following steps: •identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer; •identification of the performance obligations in the contract; •determination of the transaction price; •allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and •recognition of revenues when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation. we believe the area we apply the most critical judgment when determining revenue recognition relates to the identification of distinct performance obligations. identification of performance obligations a performance obligation is a promise in a contract with a customer to transfer products or services that are distinct. our contracts with customers may include multiple promises to transfer services to a customer. determining whether products and services are distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately or combined as a single performance obligation may require significant judgment that requires us to assess the nature of the promise and the value delivered to the customer. our primary performance obligations consist of subscription services and professional services. we satisfy these performance obligations over time as we transfer the promised services to our customers. subscription services are made up of a daily requirement to deliver the service to the customer. each day the delivery of the service provides value to the customer and each day represents a measure toward completion of the service. as such, subscription services meet the criteria to be a series of distinct services. in determining whether professional services are distinct, we consider the following factors for each professional services agreement: availability of the services from other vendors, the nature of the professional services, the timing of when the professional services contract was signed in comparison to the subscription start date, and the contractual dependence of the service on the customer’s satisfaction with the professional services work. to date, we have concluded that professional services included in contracts with multiple performance obligations are generally distinct as the professional services are not interrelated with subscription services nor do they result in significant customization of the subscription service. as such, we view professional services as a performance obligation to the customer. at contract inception, we evaluate whether two or more contracts should be combined and accounted for as a single contract and whether the combined or single contract includes more than one performance obligation. we combine contracts entered into at or near the same time with the same customer if we determine that the contracts are negotiated as a package with a single commercial objective; the amount of consideration to be paid in one contract depends on the price or performance of the other contract; or the services promised in the contracts are a single performance obligation. for contracts that contain multiple performance obligations, we assess each promise separately and allocate the transaction price on a relative standalone selling price (“ssp”) basis. we apply significant judgment in identifying and evaluating any terms and conditions in contracts which may impact revenue recognition. deferred commissions sales commissions earned by our sales force are considered incremental and recoverable costs of obtaining a contract with a customer. sales commissions for new revenue contracts are capitalized and then amortized on a straight-line basis over a period of benefit that we have determined to be five years. we determined the period of benefit by taking into consideration our customer contracts, our technology, and other factors. periodically, we review whether events or changes in circumstances have occurred that could impact the period of benefit. any future changes in circumstances around the terms of our initial and renewal contracts, customer attrition, underlying technology life, and certain other factors may materially change the period of benefit and therefore the amortization amounts recognized on the consolidated statements of operations. there was no change to the period of benefit during the periods presented. income taxes we record a provision for (benefit from) income taxes for the anticipated tax consequences of the reported results of operations using the asset and liability method. under this method, we recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax basis of assets and liabilities, as well as for operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the tax rates that are expected to apply to taxable income for the years in which those tax assets and liabilities are expected to be realized or settled. a valuation allowance is established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the net amount that is more likely than not to be realized. significant judgment is required in determining any valuation allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. in assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we consider all available evidence, both positive and negative, including past operating results, estimates of future taxable income, and the feasibility of tax planning strategies. in the event that we change our determination as to the amount of deferred tax assets that can be realized, we will adjust our valuation allowance with a corresponding impact to the provision for (benefit from) income taxes in the period in which such determination is made. we recognize the tax benefit of an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the position is sustainable upon examination by the taxing authority, based on the technical merits. the tax benefit recognized is measured as the largest amount of benefit which is greater than 50% likely to be realized upon settlement with the taxing authority. significant judgment is required to evaluate uncertain tax positions. our evaluations are based upon a number of factors, including changes in facts or circumstances, changes in tax law or guidance, correspondence with tax authorities during the course of audits, and effective settlement of audit issues. changes in the recognition or measurement of uncertain tax positions could result in material increases or decreases in our provision for (benefit from) income taxes in the period in which we make the change. business combinations, goodwill, and acquisition-related intangible assets we allocate the purchase consideration of acquired companies to tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values at the acquisition date, with the excess recorded to goodwill. the purchase price allocation process requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions related to the fair value of identifiable intangible assets, deferred tax asset valuation allowances, liabilities related to uncertain tax positions, and contingencies. critical estimates used in valuing certain intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows from acquired customer contracts, expected life cycle and innovation timelines for acquired technologies, forecasted customer attrition rates and revenue growth, the fair value of pre-existing relationships, royalty rates for comparable market technologies, and discount rates. the amounts and estimated useful lives assigned to acquisition-related intangible assets impact the amount and timing of future amortization expense. we test goodwill and acquisition-related intangible assets for impairment on an annual basis, or more frequently if a significant event or circumstance indicates impairment, by considering qualitative and quantitative factors. significant qualitative inputs used in our impairment tests include, but are not limited to, consideration of general macroeconomic conditions, industry market conditions, workday’s overall financial performance, and growth or declines in workday’s share price. the primary quantitative input for our impairment test is workday’s market capitalization as of the date of the analysis. we also evaluate the estimated remaining useful lives of acquisition-related intangible assets for changes in circumstances that warrant a revision to the remaining periods of amortization at least annually, or more frequently if significant events or circumstances indicate a change in expected use. non-marketable equity investments non-marketable equity investments include investments in privately held companies without readily determinable fair values in which we do not own a controlling interest or exercise significant influence. we adjust the carrying values of non-marketable equity investments based on both observable and unobservable inputs or data in an inactive market. valuations of non-marketable equity investments are inherently complex due to the lack of readily available market data, and require our judgment due to the absence of market prices and an inherent lack of liquidity. in addition, the rights and preferences related to the particular non-marketable equity investments, as compared to the rights and preferences of other securities within the company’s capital structure, may impact the magnitude of change in the fair value of our investment as compared to the change in total enterprise value of the company. we assess our non-marketable equity investments quarterly for impairment. our impairment analysis encompasses a qualitative and quantitative analysis of key factors including the investee’s financial metrics, such as growth or decline in revenues and operating expenses, market acceptance of the investee’s product or technology, other competitive products or technology in the market, general market conditions, and the rate at which the investee is using its cash. these factors require significant judgment. if impairment indicators are identified, we will assess the severity and duration of the impairment. change in accounting estimate see note 1, overview and basis of presentation, of the notes to consolidated financial statements included in part ii, item 8 of this report for additional information on our change in estimated useful lives of our data center equipment in fiscal 2024. recent accounting pronouncements see note 2, accounting standards and significant accounting policies, of the notes to consolidated financial statements included in part ii, item 8 of this report for a full description of recent accounting pronouncements.