table of contents item 7. management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations. introduction our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations (md&a) is provided to assist readers in understanding our performance, as reflected in the results of our operations, our financial condition and our cash flows and should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes to consolidated financial statements included in item 8. financial statements and supplementary data. the discussion in this md&a contains forward-looking statements that involve substantial risks and uncertainties. our objective is to also provide discussion of material events and uncertainties known to management that are reasonably likely to cause reported financial information not to be indicative of future results, which could differ materially from historical performance and from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements as a result of various factors such as those discussed in item 1a. risk factors and forward-looking statements and factors that may affect future results sections of this md&a. a discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for fiscal 2024 compared to fiscal 2023 is presented below. a discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for fiscal 2023 compared to fiscal 2022 can be found under item 7 of part ii of our annual report on form 10-k for the fiscal year ended december 31, 2023, filed with the sec on february 14, 2024 (our “2023 annual report”), which is available free of charge on the sec’s website at www.sec.gov. overview of our business we are a global leader in the animal health industry, focused on the discovery, development, manufacture and commercialization of medicines, vaccines, diagnostic products and services, biodevices, genetic tests and precision animal health. for over 70 years, we have been innovating ways to predict, prevent, detect, and treat animal illness, and continue to stand by those raising and caring for animals worldwide - from veterinarians and pet owners to livestock producers. we manage our operations through two geographic operating segments: the united states (u.s.) and international. within each of these operating segments, we offer diverse products for both companion animals and livestock customers in order to capitalize on local and regional trends and customer needs. see notes to consolidated financial statements—note 19. segment information. we directly market our products to veterinarians and livestock producers located in approximately 45 countries across north america, europe, africa, asia, australia and south america, and are a market leader in nearly all of the major regions in which we operate. through our efforts to establish an early and direct presence in many emerging markets, such as brazil, chile, china and mexico, we believe we are one of the largest animal health medicines and vaccines businesses as measured by revenue across emerging markets as a whole. in markets where we do not have a direct commercial presence, we generally contract with distributors that provide logistics and sales and marketing support for our products. we believe our investments in one of the industry’s largest sales organizations, including our extensive network of technical and veterinary operations specialists, our high-quality manufacturing and reliability of supply, and our long track record of developing products that meet customer needs, has led to enduring and valued relationships with our customers. our research and development (r&d) efforts enable us to deliver innovative products to address unmet needs and evolve our products so that they remain relevant for our customers. we have approximately 300 product lines that we sell in over 100 countries for the prediction, prevention, detection and treatment of diseases and conditions that affect various companion animal and livestock species. the diversity of our product portfolio and our global operations provides stability to our overall business. a summary of our 2024 performance compared with the comparable 2023 and 2022 periods follows: year ended december 31,% change (millions of dollars)20242023202224/2323/22 revenue$9,256 $8,544 $8,080 8 6 net income attributable to zoetis2,486 2,344 2,114 6 11 adjusted net income(a) 2,693 2,457 2,297 10 7 (a) adjusted net income is a non-gaap financial measure. see the non-gaap financial measures and adjusted net income sections of this md&a for more information. our operating environment industry the animal health industry, which focuses on both companion animals and livestock, is a growing industry that impacts billions of people worldwide. the primary companion animal species are dogs, cats and horses. factors influencing growth in demand for companion animal medicines, vaccines and diagnostics include: •increasing pet owners’ commitment to the health and well-being of their pets; •economic development and related increases in disposable income, particularly in many emerging markets; •companion animals living longer; •increasing medical treatment of companion animals; and •advances in companion animal medicines, vaccines and diagnostics. the primary livestock species are cattle (both beef and dairy), swine, poultry, fish and sheep. livestock health and production are essential to meeting the growing demand for animal protein of a global population. factors influencing growth in demand for livestock medicines and vaccines 31 | table of contents include: •human population growth and increasing standards of living, particularly in many emerging markets; •increasing demand for improved nutrition, particularly animal protein; •natural resource constraints, such as scarcity of arable land, fresh water and increased competition for cultivated land, resulting in fewer resources that will be available to meet an increasing demand for animal protein; •increasing urbanization; and •increased focus on food safety and food security. the overall economic environment in addition to industry-specific factors, we, like other businesses, face challenges related to global economic conditions, an economic downturn and high inflation. growth in both the livestock and companion animal sectors is driven by overall economic development and related growth, particularly in many emerging markets. in the past, certain of our customers and suppliers have been affected directly by shortages in veterinary healthcare workers and economic downturns or inflation, which decreased the demand for our products and, in some cases, hindered our ability to collect amounts due from customers. industry sources have reported that pet owners indicated a preference for reducing spending on other aspects of their lifestyle, including entertainment, clothing and household goods, before reducing spending on pet healthcare. similarly, the cost of medicines and vaccines to our livestock producer customers is small relative to other production costs, including feed, and the use of these products is intended to improve livestock producers’ economic outcomes. as a result, demand for our products has historically been more stable than demand for other production inputs. each of these factors, plus our broad and innovative portfolio, contributes to our ability to incorporate inflationary challenges into our product pricing and mitigate the impact on our results. while these factors have mitigated the impact of prior downturns in the global economy, economic challenges, including an economic downturn and inflation, could increase cost sensitivity among our customers, which may result in reduced demand for our products, which could have a material adverse effect on our operating results and financial condition. competition the animal health industry is highly competitive. although our business is the largest based on revenue in the animal health industry (which includes medicines, vaccines and diagnostics), we face competition in the regions in which we operate. principal methods of competition vary depending on the particular region, species, product category or individual product. some of these methods include new product development, quality, price, service and promotion to veterinary professionals, pet owners and livestock producers. our competitors include standalone animal health businesses and the animal health businesses of large pharmaceutical companies. in recent years, there has been an increase in consolidation in the animal health industry. there are also many start-up companies working in the animal health area. in addition to competition from established market participants, there could be new entrants to the animal health medicines, vaccines and diagnostics industry in the future. we also compete with companies that produce generic products, following our products’ loss of exclusivity in a given market. for example, draxxin currently competes with generic products in key markets including the u.s., europe, canada, mexico and australia. since 2021, the first year of generic competition, sales of draxxin declined by 49% in the u.s., its largest market. for more information regarding the generic competition we expect to encounter as patents on certain of our key products expire, see item 1. business – intellectual property. manufacturing and supply in order to sell our products, we must be able to produce and ship our products in sufficient quantities. many of our products involve complex manufacturing processes and are sole-sourced from certain manufacturing sites. minor deviations in our manufacturing or logistical processes, such as temperature excursions or improper package sealing, could result in delays, inventory shortages, unanticipated costs, product recalls, product liability and/or regulatory action. in addition, a number of factors could cause production interruptions that could result in launch delays, inventory shortages, recalls, unanticipated costs or issues with our supply agreements with third parties. our manufacturing network may be unable to meet the demand for our products or we may have excess capacity if demand for our products changes. the unpredictability of a product's regulatory or commercial success or failure, the lead time necessary to construct highly technical and complex manufacturing sites, and shifting customer demand increase the potential for capacity imbalances. perceptions of product quality, safety and reliability we believe that animal health customers value high-quality manufacturing and reliability of supply. the importance of quality and safety concerns to pet owners, veterinarians and livestock producers also contributes to animal health brand loyalty, which often continues after the loss of patent-based and regulatory exclusivity. we depend on positive perceptions of the safety and quality of our products by our customers, veterinarians and end-users. in addition, negative beliefs about animal health products generally could impact demand for our products. for example, the issue of the potential transfer of increased antibacterial resistance in bacteria from food-producing animals to human pathogens, and the causality of that transfer, continue to be the subject of global scientific and regulatory discussion. in some countries, this issue has led to government restrictions and bans on the use of specific antibacterials in some food-producing animals, regardless of the route of administration (in feed or injectable). in addition, consumer preferences in some markets have impacted the use of antibacterials in food producing animals. such restrictions and consumer preferences in some cases may negatively impact sales of our antibacterial products, but in other instances may increase sales of our products that can be used as antibacterial alternatives. our total revenue attributable to antibacterials for livestock was approximately $950 million for the year ended december 31, 2024. as a result of the divestiture of our medicated feed additive product portfolio, certain water soluble products and related assets, we anticipate our total revenues attributable to antibacterials for livestock will decrease. similarly, concerns regarding greenhouse gas emissions and other potential environmental impacts of livestock production have led to some consumers opting to limit or avoid consuming animal products. however, we believe the impact of this trend is limited as the livestock industry is still expected to continue to grow in order to feed a growing global population. 32 | product development initiatives our future success depends on both our existing products and our pipeline of new products, including new products that we may develop through joint ventures and products that we are able to obtain through license or acquisition. we believe we are an industry leader in animal health r&d, with a track record of generating new products and product lifecycle innovation, which is defined as r&d programs that leverage existing animal health products by adding new species or claims, achieving approvals in new markets or creating new reformulations, modifications and combinations. the majority of our r&d programs focus on new products. in addition to traditional medicines and vaccines, we develop products across additional categories to address the needs of veterinarians and producers to predict, prevent, detect and treat conditions in both companion animals and livestock, including products and services in diagnostics, genetics, precision animal health and digital and data analytics. changing distribution channels for companion animal products in most markets, companion animal owners typically purchase their animal health products directly from veterinarians. however, in the u.s. and certain other markets, companion animal owners increasingly have the option to purchase animal health products from sources other than veterinarians, such as internet-based retailers, “big-box” retail stores or other over-the-counter distribution channels. we believe the ability of pet owners to purchase our products online and from retail stores may increase pet owner compliance and result in increased sales. however, over time, we may be unable to sustain our current margins due to the increased purchasing power of such retailers as compared to traditional veterinary practices. in addition, this trend could negatively impact the sales of products we primarily sell through the veterinarian distribution channel, as any decrease in visits to veterinarians by companion animal owners could reduce our market share and sales of such products. a reduction in the number of pet owners who purchase our products directly from their veterinarian could also lead to increased use of generic alternatives to our products or the increased substitution of our products with other animal health products or human health products if such other products are deemed to be lower-cost alternatives. disease outbreaks sales of our livestock products have in the past, and may in the future be, adversely affected by the outbreak of disease carried by animals. outbreaks of disease may reduce regional or global sales of particular animal-derived food products or result in reduced exports of such products, either due to heightened export restrictions or import prohibitions, which may reduce demand for our products. also, the outbreak of any highly contagious disease near our main production sites could require us to immediately halt production of our products at such sites or force us to incur substantial expenses in procuring raw materials or products elsewhere. alternatively, sales of products that treat specific disease outbreaks may increase. foreign exchange rates significant portions of our revenue and costs are exposed to changes in foreign exchange rates. our products are sold in more than 100 countries and, as a result, our revenue is influenced by changes in foreign exchange rates. for the year ended december 31, 2024, approximately 41% of our revenue was denominated in foreign currencies. we seek to manage our foreign exchange risk, in part, through operational means, including managing same-currency revenue in relation to same-currency costs and same-currency assets in relation to same-currency liabilities. as we operate in multiple foreign currencies, including the australian dollar, brazilian real, british pound, canadian dollar, chinese renminbi, euro and other currencies, changes in those currencies relative to the u.s. dollar will impact our revenue, cost of goods and expenses, and consequently, net income. exchange rate fluctuations may also have an impact beyond our reported financial results and directly impact operations. these fluctuations may affect the ability to buy and sell our goods and services between markets impacted by significant exchange rate variances. for the year ended december 31, 2024, approximately 59% of our total revenue was in u.s. dollars. our year-over-year total revenue growth was unfavorably impacted by 3% from changes in foreign currency values relative to the u.s. dollar. weather conditions, climate change and the availability of natural resources the animal health industry and demand for many of our animal health products in a particular region are affected by weather conditions, as usage of our products follows varying weather patterns and weather-related pressures from pests, such as ticks. as a result, we may experience regional and seasonal fluctuations in our results of operations. in addition, veterinary hospitals and practitioners depend on visits from and access to the animals under their care. veterinarians’ patient volume and ability to operate could be adversely affected if they experience prolonged snow, ice or other severe weather conditions, particularly in regions not accustomed to sustained inclement weather. furthermore, weather conditions, including excessive cold or heat, natural disasters and other events, could negatively impact our livestock customers by impairing the health or growth of their animals or the production or availability of feed, as well as disrupting their normal operations. for example, livestock producers depend on the availability of natural resources, including large supplies of fresh water. their animals’ health and their ability to operate could be adversely affected if they experience a shortage of fresh water due to human population growth, climate change or floods, droughts or other weather conditions. in the event of adverse weather conditions, climate-change related impacts or a shortage of fresh water, veterinarians and livestock producers may purchase less of our products. adverse weather conditions, natural disasters and climate change may also impact the aquaculture business. changes in water temperatures could affect the timing of reproduction and growth of various fish species, as well as trigger the outbreak of certain waterborne diseases. our strategic pillars our vision is to be the most trusted and valued animal health company, shaping the future of animal care through our innovation, customer obsession and purpose-driven colleagues. we have a global presence in both developed and emerging markets and across eight core species. we intend to grow our business by pursuing the following core strategies: •lead through innovation across our diverse portfolio - we seek to define the future of animal health by delivering new products and solutions as well as lifecycle innovations across the continuum of care that span from disease prediction and prevention to detection and treatment. we are focused on innovating across vaccines, pharmaceuticals, diagnostics, genetics, biodevices, and other product segments, and across all core species. our internal r&d capabilities are differentiators, but we also collaborate across both academia and industry partners to ensure we are bringing the best possible innovations to our customers; 33 | •deliver an exceptional experience to delight our customers - we believe that our customers' success is our success and that the best way to realize that success is by enabling veterinarians, livestock producers and pet owners to provide the best possible care for animals. we are focused on providing greater value to our customers through the integration and connectedness of our portfolio and by reducing frictions in the way they engage with us and our products and solutions; •power our business through digital solutions and data insights - we believe that digital and data are no longer just enablers, but are core decision drivers for the future of animal health. we are leaders in the translation of digital solutions and data insights to positive outcomes for our customers and for the animals they care for, whether for better identification of health care solutions in pets or improved production capabilities in livestock; •support a workplace where our colleagues can thrive - we view the strength of our leadership team and our talented colleagues around the world as a critical component of our past and future success. we believe that by focusing on colleague well-being and providing all of our colleagues with supportive tools, training and environment that we are best positioned to succeed. with that, our colleagues are committed to our purpose, our customers and each other. we are committed to maintaining an inclusive workplace culture that attracts, retains and develops the best talent in the industry; •advance sustainability in animal health for a better future - as the world’s leading animal health company, our business purpose is well aligned with our social purpose. we strive to make a meaningful difference in society through the three pillars of our sustainability approach: (1) by improving access to care for animals and by supporting the veterinary profession; (2) by leveraging our innovation capabilities to develop solutions that improve productivity, keep animals healthy, and fight emerging infectious diseases; and (3) by taking actions to protect our planet that reduce our footprint on the environment; and •perform with excellence and agility - we recognize the increasing uncertainty in our industry and more broadly across the world. while we aim to improve our ability to predict, we more importantly aim to be proactive in how we effectively manage our resources and how quickly we can redeploy focus to emerging themes or priorities. we actively: (1) review and manage our resource allocation; (2) continuously improve key operational processes; and (3) ensure strategic focus on our core business. components of revenue and costs and expenses our revenue, costs and expenses are reported for the year ended december 31 for each year presented, except for operations outside the u.s., for which the financial information is included in our consolidated financial statements for the fiscal year ended november 30 for each year presented. revenue our revenue is primarily derived from our diversified product portfolio of medicines, vaccines and diagnostic products and services used to treat and protect companion animals and livestock. generally, our products are promoted to veterinarians and livestock producers by our sales organization which includes sales representatives and technical and veterinary operations specialists, and then sold directly by us or through distributors, retailers or e-commerce outlets. the depth of our product portfolio enables us to address the varying needs of customers in different species and geographies. in 2024, our two top-selling products and product lines, simparica/simparica trio and apoquel/apoquel chewable, contributed approximately 15% and 11% of our revenue, respectively, and combined with our next three top-selling products and product lines, cytopoint, librela and our ceftiofur line, these five products and product lines contributed approximately 41% of our revenue. our ten top-selling products and product lines contributed 55% of our revenue. for additional information regarding our products, including descriptions of our product lines that each represented approximately 1% or more of our revenue in 2024, see item 1. business—products. costs and expenses costs of sales consist primarily of cost of materials, facilities and other infrastructure used to manufacture our medicine and vaccine products, as well as costs to operate our reference labs and royalty expenses associated with the intellectual property of our products, when relevant. selling, general and administrative (sg&a) expenses consist of, among other things, the internal and external costs of marketing, promotion, advertising and shipping and handling as well as certain costs related to business technology, facilities, legal, finance, human resources, business development, public affairs and procurement. research and development (r&d) expenses consist primarily of project costs specific to new product r&d and product lifecycle innovation, overhead costs associated with r&d operations and investments that support local market clinical trials for approved indications and expenses related to regulatory approvals for our products. we do not disaggregate r&d expenses by research stage or by therapeutic area for purposes of managing our business. amortization of intangible assets consists primarily of the amortization expense for identifiable finite-lived intangible assets that have been acquired through business combinations. these assets consist of, but are not limited to, developed technology, brands and trademarks. restructuring charges and certain acquisition and divestiture-related costs consist of all restructuring charges (those associated with cost reduction/productivity initiatives and those associated with acquisition activity) and costs associated with executing the transaction which include acquiring and integrating businesses and costs associated with divesting and disintegrating businesses. restructuring charges are associated with employees, assets and activities that will not continue in the company. acquisition and divestiture-related costs are associated with acquiring and integrating acquired businesses, which may include expenditures for consulting and the integration of systems and processes, product transfers, transaction costs and restructuring the company, as well as costs associated with divesting and disintegrating a portion of our business which may include expenditures for consulting and the disintegration of systems and processes, transfer costs, and restructuring charges which may include charges related to employees, assets and activities that will not continue in the company's ongoing operations. other (income)/deductions—net consists of various items, primarily net (gains)/losses on business sales and divestitures, as well as asset disposals, interest income, royalty-related income, foreign exchange translation (gains)/losses and certain asset impairment charges. 34 | significant accounting policies and application of critical accounting estimates in presenting our financial statements in conformity with u.s. gaap, we are required to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses and related disclosures. for a description of our significant accounting policies, see notes to consolidated financial statements—note 3. significant accounting policies. we believe that the following accounting policies are critical to an understanding of our consolidated financial statements as they require the application of the most difficult, subjective and complex judgments and, therefore, could have the greatest impact on our financial statements: (i) fair value; (ii) revenue; (iii) asset impairment reviews; and (iv) contingencies. below are some of our more critical accounting estimates. see notes to consolidated financial statements—note 3. significant accounting policies: estimates and assumptions for a discussion about the risks associated with estimates and assumptions. fair value for a discussion about the application of fair value to our long-term debt and financial instruments, see notes to consolidated financial statements—note 9. financial instruments. for a discussion about the application of fair value to our business combinations, see notes to consolidated financial statements—note 3. significant accounting policies: fair value. for a discussion about the application of fair value to our asset impairment reviews, see asset impairment reviews below. revenue our gross product revenue is subject to deductions that are generally estimated and recorded in the same period that the revenue is recognized and primarily represents sales returns and revenue incentives. for example: •for sales returns, we perform calculations in each market that incorporate the following, as appropriate: local returns policies and practices; past returns as a percentage of revenue; an understanding of the reasons for past returns; estimated shelf life by product; an estimate of the amount of time between shipment and return or lag time; and any other factors that could impact the estimate of future returns, product recalls, discontinuation of products or a changing competitive environment; and •for revenue incentives, we use our historical experience with similar incentives programs to estimate the impact of such programs on revenue. if any of our ratios, factors, assessments, experiences or judgments are not indicative or accurate predictors of our future experience, our results could be materially affected. although the amounts recorded for these revenue deductions are dependent on estimates and assumptions, historically our adjustments to actual results have not been material. the sensitivity of our estimates can vary by program, type of customer and geographic location. amounts recorded for revenue deductions can result from a complex series of judgments about future events and uncertainties and can rely on estimates and assumptions. for further information about the risks associated with estimates and assumptions, see notes to consolidated financial statements—note 3. significant accounting policies: estimates and assumptions. asset impairment reviews we review all of our long-lived assets for impairment indicators throughout the year and we perform detailed testing whenever impairment indicators are present. in addition, we perform impairment testing for goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets at least annually. when necessary, we record charges for impairments of long-lived assets for the amount by which the fair value is less than the carrying value of these assets. our impairment review processes are described below and in notes to consolidated financial statements—note 3. significant accounting policies: amortization of intangible assets, depreciation and certain long-lived assets and, for deferred tax assets, in note 3. significant accounting policies: deferred tax assets and liabilities and income tax contingencies. examples of events or circumstances that may be indicative of impairment include: •a significant adverse change in the extent or manner in which an asset is used. for example, restrictions imposed by the regulatory authorities could affect our ability to manufacture or sell a product; and •a projection or forecast that demonstrates losses or reduced profits associated with an asset. this could result, for example, from the introduction of a competitor’s product that results in a significant loss of market share or the inability to achieve the previously projected revenue growth, or from the lack of acceptance of a product by customers. for finite-lived identifiable intangible assets, such as developed technology rights, and for other long-lived assets, such as property, plant and equipment, whenever impairment indicators are present, we calculate the undiscounted value of the projected cash flows associated with the asset, or asset group, and compare this estimated amount to the carrying amount. if the carrying amount is found to be greater, we record an impairment loss for the excess of book value over fair value. in addition, in all cases of an impairment review, we re-evaluate the remaining useful lives of the assets and modify them, as appropriate. our impairment reviews of most of our long-lived assets depend on the determination of fair value, as defined by u.s. gaap, and these judgments can materially impact our results of operations. a single estimate of fair value can result from a complex series of judgments about future events and uncertainties and can rely on estimates and assumptions. for information about the risks associated with estimates and assumptions, see notes to consolidated financial statements—note 3. significant accounting policies: estimates and assumptions. intangible assets other than goodwill we test indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment at least annually, or more frequently if impairment indicators exist, by first assessing qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible asset is less than its carrying amount. if we conclude it is more likely than not that the fair value is less than the carrying amount, a quantitative test that compares the fair value of 35 | the indefinite-lived intangible asset with its carrying value is performed. if the fair value is less than the carrying amount, an impairment loss is recognized. impairments of identifiable intangible assets other than goodwill, are recorded in restructuring charges and certain acquisition and divestiture-related costs and other (income)/deductions—net, as applicable. we did not have any material intangible asset impairment charges for the years ended december 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022. when we are required to determine the fair value of intangible assets other than goodwill, we use an income approach, specifically the multi-period excess earnings method, also known as the discounted cash flow method. we start with a forecast of all the expected net cash flows associated with the asset, which includes the application of a terminal value for indefinite-lived assets, and then we apply an asset-specific discount rate to arrive at a net present value amount. some of the more significant estimates and assumptions inherent in this approach include: the amount and timing of the projected net cash flows, which includes the expected impact of competitive, legal and/or regulatory forces on the projections, the impact of technological risk associated with ipr&d assets, as well as the selection of a long-term growth rate; the discount rate, which seeks to reflect the risks inherent in the projected cash flows; foreign currency fluctuations; and the effective tax rate, which seeks to incorporate the geographic diversity of the projected cash flows. while all identifiable intangible assets can be impacted by events and thus lead to impairment, in general, identifiable intangible assets that are at the highest risk of impairment include ipr&d assets ($136 million as of december 31, 2024). ipr&d assets are higher-risk assets given the uncertain nature of r&d activity. for a description of our accounting policy, see notes to consolidated financial statements—note 3. significant accounting policies: amortization of intangible assets, depreciation and certain long-lived assets. goodwill goodwill represents the excess of the consideration transferred over the fair value of net assets of businesses purchased and is assigned to reporting units. we test goodwill for impairment on at least an annual basis, or more frequently if necessary, either by assessing qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount or by performing a periodic quantitative assessment. factors considered in the qualitative assessment include general macroeconomic conditions, conditions specific to the industry and market, cost factors which could have a significant effect on earnings or cash flows, the overall financial performance of the reporting unit and whether there have been sustained declines in our share price. additionally, we evaluate the extent to which the fair value exceeded the carrying value of the reporting unit at the date of the last quantitative assessment performed. when performing a quantitative assessment to test for goodwill impairment we utilize the income approach, which is forward-looking, and relies primarily on internal forecasts. within the income approach, the method that we use is the discounted cash flow method. we start with a forecast of all the expected net cash flows associated with the reporting unit, which includes the application of a terminal value, and then apply a reporting unit-specific discount rate to arrive at a net present value. some of the more significant estimates and assumptions inherent in this approach include: the amount and timing of the projected net cash flows, which includes the expected impact of technological risk and competitive, legal and/or regulatory forces on the projections, as well as the selection of a long-term growth rate; the discount rate, which seeks to reflect the various risks inherent in the projected cash flows; and the effective tax rate, which seeks to incorporate the geographic diversity of the projected cash flows. we test goodwill for impairment on at least an annual basis, or more frequently if necessary, either by assessing qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount or by performing a periodic quantitative assessment. in 2024, we performed a periodic quantitative impairment assessment as of september 30, 2024, which did not result in the impairment of goodwill associated with any of our reporting units. in 2023, we performed a qualitative impairment assessment as of september 30, 2023, which did not result in the impairment of goodwill associated with any of our reporting units. for all of our reporting units, there are a number of future events and factors that may impact future results and that could potentially have an impact on the outcome of subsequent goodwill impairment testing. for a list of these factors, see forward-looking statements and factors that may affect future results. for a description of our accounting policy, see notes to consolidated financial statements—note 3. significant accounting policies: amortization of intangible assets, depreciation and certain long-lived assets. contingencies for a discussion about income tax contingencies, see notes to consolidated financial statements—note 8c. tax matters: tax contingencies. for a discussion about legal contingencies, guarantees and indemnifications, see notes to consolidated financial statement—note 18. commitments and contingencies. non-gaap financial measures we report information in accordance with u.s. generally accepted accounting principles (gaap). management also measures performance using non-gaap financial measures that may exclude certain amounts from the most directly comparable gaap measure. despite the importance of these measures to management in goal setting and performance measurement, non-gaap financial measures have no standardized meaning prescribed by u.s. gaap and, therefore, have limits in their usefulness to investors and may not be comparable to the calculation of similar measures of other companies. we present certain identified non-gaap measures solely to provide investors with useful information to more fully understand how management assesses performance. operational growth we believe that it is important to not only understand overall revenue and earnings growth, but also “operational growth.” operational growth is a non-gaap financial measure defined as revenue or earnings growth excluding the impact of foreign exchange. this measure provides information on the change in revenue and earnings as if foreign currency exchange rates had not changed between the current and prior periods to facilitate a 36 | period-to-period comparison. we believe this non-gaap measure provides a useful comparison to previous periods for the company and investors, but should not be viewed as a substitute for u.s. gaap reported growth. adjusted net income and adjusted earnings per share adjusted net income and the corresponding adjusted earnings per share (eps) are non-gaap financial measures of performance used by management. we believe these financial measures are useful supplemental information to investors when considered together with our u.s. gaap financial measures. we report adjusted net income to portray the results of our major operations, and the discovery, development, manufacture and commercialization of our products, prior to considering certain income statement elements. we define adjusted net income and adjusted eps as net income attributable to zoetis and eps before the impact of purchase accounting adjustments, acquisition and divestiture-related costs and certain significant items. we recognize that, as an internal measure of performance, the adjusted net income and adjusted eps measures have limitations, and we do not restrict our performance management process solely to these metrics. a limitation of the adjusted net income and adjusted eps measures is that they provide a view of our operations without including all events during a period, such as the effects of an acquisition or amortization of purchased intangibles, and do not provide a comparable view of our performance to other companies. the adjusted net income and adjusted eps measures are not, and should not be viewed as, a substitute for u.s. gaap reported net income attributable to zoetis and reported eps. see the adjusted net income section below for more information. analysis of the consolidated statements of income the following discussion and analysis of our consolidated statements of income should be read along with our consolidated financial statements, and the notes thereto. year ended december 31,% change (millions of dollars)20242023202224/2323/22 revenue$9,256 $8,544 $8,080 8 6 costs and expenses: cost of sales(a) 2,719 2,561 2,454 6 4 % of revenue29.4 %30.0 %30.4 % selling, general and administrative expenses(a) 2,318 2,151 2,009 8 7 % of revenue25 %25 %25 % research and development expenses(a) 686 614 539 12 14 % of revenue7 %7 %7 % amortization of intangible assets(a) 141 149 150 (5)(1) restructuring charges and certain acquisition and divestiture-related costs53 53 11 — * interest expense, net of capitalized interest225 239 221 (6)8 other (income)/deductions—net(19)(159)40 (88)* income before provision for taxes on income3,133 2,936 2,656 7 11 % of revenue34 %34 %33 % provision for taxes on income637 596 545 7 9 effective tax rate20.3 %20.3 %20.5 % net income before allocation to noncontrolling interests2,496 2,340 2,111 7 11 less: net gain/(loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests10 (4)(3)*33 net income attributable to zoetis$2,486 $2,344 $2,114 6 11 % of revenue27 %27 %26 % * calculation not meaningful. (a) amortization expense related to finite-lived acquired intangible assets that contribute to our ability to sell, manufacture, research, market and distribute products, compounds and intellectual property is included in amortization of intangible assets as these intangible assets benefit multiple business functions. amortization expense related to finite-lived acquired intangible assets that are associated with a single function is included in cost of sales, selling, general and administrative expenses or research and development expenses, as appropriate. revenue total revenue by operating segment was as follows: year ended december 31,% change (millions of dollars)20242023202224/2323/22 u.s.$5,074 $4,555 $4,313 11 6 international4,102 3,911 3,681 5 6 total operating segments9,176 8,466 7,994 8 6 contract manufacturing & human health80 78 86 3 (9) total revenue$9,256 $8,544 $8,080 8 6 37 | on a global basis, the mix of revenue between companion animal and livestock products was as follows: year ended december 31,% change (millions of dollars)20242023202224/2323/22 companion animal$6,278 $5,576 $5,203 13 7 livestock2,898 2,890 2,791 — 4 contract manufacturing & human health80 78 86 3 (9) total revenue$9,256 $8,544 $8,080 8 6 2024 vs. 2023 total revenue increased by $712 million, or 8%, in 2024 compared with 2023 reflecting operational revenue growth of $921 million, or 11%. operational revenue growth was primarily due to the following: •price growth of approximately 6%; •volume growth from new products of approximately 3%; and •volume growth from key dermatology products of approximately 2%. foreign exchange decreased our reported revenue growth by approximately 3%. costs and expenses cost of sales year ended december 31,% change (millions of dollars)20242023202224/2323/22 cost of sales$2,719 $2,561 $2,454 6 4 % of revenue29.4 %30.0 %30.4 % 2024 vs. 2023 cost of sales as a percentage of revenue was 29.4% in 2024, compared with 30.0% in 2023. the decrease was primarily as a result of: •price increases; •favorable product mix; •lower inventory charges; and •lower freight costs, partially offset by: •unfavorable manufacturing and other costs; and •unfavorable foreign exchange. selling, general and administrative expenses year ended december 31,% change (millions of dollars)20242023202224/2323/22 selling, general and administrative expenses$2,318 $2,151 $2,009 8 7 % of revenue25 %25 %25 % 2024 vs. 2023 sg&a expenses increased by $167 million, or 8%, in 2024 compared with 2023, primarily as a result of: •an increase in certain compensation-related costs; •higher selling and distribution costs; •higher advertising and promotion expenses; •higher professional and consulting fees; and •higher travel and entertainment expenses, partially offset by: •favorable foreign exchange; •the reduced impact of purchase accounting adjustments; and •lower other general and administrative expenses. 38 | research and development expenses year ended december 31,% change (millions of dollars)20242023202224/2323/22 research and development expenses$686 $614 $539 12 14 % of revenue7 %7 %7 % 2024 vs. 2023 r&d expenses increased by $72 million, or 12%, in 2024 compared with 2023, primarily as a result of: •an increase in certain compensation-related costs to support innovation and portfolio progression; •higher spend in project investments; and •higher depreciation expense. amortization of intangible assets year ended december 31,% change (millions of dollars)20242023202224/2323/22 amortization of intangible assets$141 $149 $150 (5)(1) 2024 vs. 2023 amortization of intangible assets decreased in 2024 compared with 2023 primarily due to asset impairments taken in 2024 and 2023, as well as assets that became fully amortized, partially offset by intangible assets placed in service in 2024 and 2023. restructuring charges and certain acquisition and divestiture-related costs year ended december 31,% change (millions of dollars)20242023202224/2323/22 restructuring charges and certain acquisition and divestiture-related costs$53 $53 $11 — * * calculation not meaningful. 2024 vs. 2023 restructuring charges and certain acquisition and divestiture-related costs were $53 million in 2024 and 2023. restructuring charges and certain acquisition and divestiture-related costs in 2024 primarily consisted of employee termination costs related to organizational structure refinements, as well as costs related to the sale of our medicated feed additive product portfolio, certain water soluble products and related assets, partially offset by a reversal of certain employee termination costs as a result of a change in strategy from our 2015 operational efficiency initiative. restructuring charges and certain acquisition and divestiture-related costs in 2023 primarily consisted of employee termination and exit costs related to organizational structure refinements and other cost-reduction and productivity initiatives, as well as costs related to recent acquisitions. for additional information regarding restructuring charges and acquisition and divestiture-related costs, see notes to consolidated financial statements— note 6. restructuring charges and other costs associated with acquisitions and divestitures. interest expense, net of capitalized interest year ended december 31,% change (millions of dollars)20242023202224/2323/22 interest expense, net of capitalized interest$225 $239 $221 (6)8 2024 vs. 2023 interest expense, net of capitalized interest, decreased by $14 million, or 6%, in 2024 compared with 2023, primarily as a result of higher capitalized interest in the current period associated with capital projects to support our future growth and a higher debt balance during a portion of the prior year. other (income)/deductions—net year ended december 31,% change (millions of dollars)20242023202224/2323/22 other (income)/deductions—net$(19)$(159)$40 (88)* * calculation not meaningful. 2024 vs. 2023 the change in other (income)/deductions—net is primarily as a result of a gain on the sale of a majority interest in our pet insurance business in the prior period, royalty-related income in the prior period that was predominantly associated with a settlement received from a third-party for underpayment of royalties related to prior periods and a loss on the sale of our medicated feed additive product portfolio, certain water soluble products and related assets in the current period, partially offset by lower asset impairment charges in the current period. 39 | provision for taxes on income year ended december 31,% change (millions of dollars)20242023202224/2323/22 provision for taxes on income$637 $596 $545 7 9 effective tax rate20.3 %20.3 %20.5 % the income tax provision in the consolidated statements of income includes tax costs and benefits, such as uncertain tax positions, repatriation decisions and audit settlements, among others. 2024 vs. 2023 our effective tax rate was 20.3% for 2024 and 2023. the effective tax rate for 2024, as compared to 2023, was primarily attributable to the favorable impact of a higher benefit in the u.s. related to foreign-derived intangible income and lower net discrete tax expenses, offset by a less favorable jurisdictional mix of earnings (which includes the impact of the location of earnings, repatriation costs and the organisation for economic co-operation and development (oecd) global minimum tax provision (pillar two)). jurisdictional mix of earnings can vary depending on repatriation decisions, operating fluctuations in the normal course of business and the impact of non-deductible items and non-taxable items. pillar two was effective beginning in 2024 and the impact of these provisions is included in our effective tax rate for 2024. operating segment results the mix of revenue between companion animal and livestock products was as follows: % change 24/2323/22 related torelated to year ended december 31,foreign exchangeforeign exchange (millions of dollars)202420232022totaloperationaltotaloperational u.s. companion animal$4,054 $3,529 $3,341 15 — 15 6 — 6 livestock1,020 1,026 972 (1)— (1)6 — 6 5,074 4,555 4,313 11 — 11 6 — 6 international companion animal2,224 2,047 1,862 9 (4)13 10 (2)12 livestock1,878 1,864 1,819 1 (7)8 2 (5)7 4,102 3,911 3,681 5 (5)10 6 (3)9 total companion animal6,278 5,576 5,203 13 (1)14 7 (1)8 livestock2,898 2,890 2,791 — (5)5 4 (2)6 contract manufacturing & human health80 78 86 3 — 3 (9)1 (10) $9,256 $8,544 $8,080 8 (3)11 6 (1)7 40 | earnings by segment and the operational and foreign exchange changes versus the comparable prior year period were as follows: % change 24/2323/22 related torelated to year ended december 31,foreign exchangeforeign exchange (millions of dollars)202420232022totaloperationaltotaloperational u.s.$3,336 $2,863 $2,763 17 — 17 4 — 4 international2,118 2,037 1,990 4 (7)11 2 (2)4 total reportable segments5,454 4,900 4,753 11 (3)14 3 (1)4 other business activities(562)(496)(424)13 17 reconciling items: corporate(1,213)(1,042)(1,073)16 (3) purchase accounting adjustments(140)(159)(160)(12)(1) acquisition and divestiture-related costs(18)(9)(5)*80 certain significant items(79)33 (56)** other unallocated(309)(291)(379)6 (23) income before income taxes$3,133 $2,936 $2,656 7 11 * calculation not meaningful. 2024 vs. 2023 u.s. operating segment u.s. segment revenue increased by $519 million, or 11%, in 2024 compared with 2023, of which $525 million resulted from growth in companion animal products and $6 million decline in livestock products. •companion animal revenue growth was primarily due to growth in sales of simparica trio, our mab products for oa pain, librela and solensia, and key dermatology products, partially offset by lower sales of our small animal vaccines. •livestock revenue declined due to the impact of the divestiture of our medicated feed additive product portfolio, certain water soluble products and related assets, partially offset by higher sales of cattle products, driven by timing of supply and strong demand for our ceftiofur product line. u.s. segment earnings increased by $473 million, or 17%, in 2024 compared with 2023, primarily due to higher revenue, partially offset by higher cost of sales and operating expenses. international operating segment international segment revenue increased by $191 million, or 5%, in 2024 compared with 2023. operational revenue growth was $401 million, or 10%, reflecting growth of $257 million in companion animal products and $144 million in livestock products. •companion animal operational revenue growth was driven primarily by the growth in sales of our key dermatology products, mab products for oa pain, librela and solensia, small animal parasiticides and vaccine products. •livestock operational revenue growth was due to increased sales of cattle, poultry and fish products, partially offset by a decline in sales of sheep products. sales of cattle products grew due to price, partially offset by volume declines as compared to the prior year period due to prior year supply recoveries. sales of products in our poultry portfolio grew due to price and demand generation efforts in key poultry markets. sales of our fish portfolio grew due to increased vaccine sales in norway, partially offset by lower sales of parasiticides in chile. sales of sheep products declined primarily due to supply constraints in australia compounded by poor market conditions. •additionally, international segment revenue was unfavorably impacted by foreign exchange which decreased revenue by approximately $210 million, or 5%, primarily driven by fluctuations in the argentinian peso, brazilian real, turkish lira, japanese yen and egyptian pound. international segment earnings increased by $81 million, or 4%, in 2024 compared with 2023. operational earnings growth was $230 million, or 11%, primarily due to higher revenue, partially offset by higher cost of sales and operating expenses. other business activities other business activities includes our client supply services contract manufacturing results, our human health business and expenses associated with our dedicated veterinary medicine research and development organization, research alliances, u.s. regulatory affairs and other operations focused on the development of our products. other r&d-related costs associated with non-u.s. market and regulatory activities are generally included in the international segment. 2024 vs. 2023 other business activities net loss increased by $66 million, or 13%, in 2024 compared with 2023, reflecting an increase in r&d costs due to an increase in higher project investments, certain compensation-related costs to support innovation, acquisitions and other operating costs. reconciling items reconciling items include certain costs that are not allocated to our operating segments results, such as costs associated with the following: •corporate, which includes certain costs associated with information technology, facilities, legal, finance, human resources, business development, certain diagnostics costs and communications, among others. these costs also include certain compensation costs, certain procurement costs, and other miscellaneous operating expenses that are not charged to our operating segments, as well as interest income and expense; 41 | •certain transactions and events such as purchase accounting adjustments, acquisition and divestiture-related activities and certain significant items, which are defined below; and •other unallocated, which includes (i) certain overhead expenses associated with our global manufacturing operations not charged to our operating segments; (ii) certain costs associated with finance that specifically support our global manufacturing operations; (iii) certain supply chain and global logistics costs; and (iv) certain procurement costs. 2024 vs. 2023 corporate expenses increased by $171 million, or 16%, in 2024 compared with 2023, primarily due to higher compensation-related costs, a settlement received from a third-party for underpayment of royalties in the prior year period, investments in information technology and unfavorable foreign exchange. other unallocated expenses increased by $18 million, or 6%, in 2024 compared with 2023, primarily due to higher manufacturing costs and unfavorable foreign exchange, partially offset by lower freight charges and lower inventory obsolescence. see notes to consolidated financial statements— note 19. segment information for further information. adjusted net income general description of adjusted net income (a non-gaap financial measure) adjusted net income is an alternative view of performance used by management, and we believe that investors’ understanding of our performance is enhanced by disclosing this performance measure. the adjusted net income measure is an important internal measurement for us. additionally, we measure our overall performance on this basis in conjunction with other performance metrics. the following are examples of how the adjusted net income measure is utilized: •senior management receives a monthly analysis of our operating results that is prepared on an adjusted net income basis; •our annual budgets are prepared on an adjusted net income basis; and •other goal setting and performance measurements. purchase accounting adjustments adjusted net income is calculated prior to considering certain significant purchase accounting impacts that result from business combinations and net asset acquisitions. these impacts, primarily associated with certain acquisitions, include amortization related to the increase in fair value of the acquired finite-lived intangible assets and depreciation related to the increase/decrease to fair value of the acquired fixed assets. therefore, the adjusted net income measure includes the revenue earned upon the sale of the acquired products without considering the aforementioned significant charges. while certain purchase accounting adjustments can occur through 20 or more years, this presentation provides an alternative view of our performance that is used by management to internally assess business performance. we believe the elimination of amortization attributable to acquired intangible assets provides management and investors an alternative view of our business results by providing a degree of parity to internally developed intangible assets for which r&d costs previously have been expensed. a completely accurate comparison of internally developed intangible assets and acquired intangible assets cannot be achieved through adjusted net income. these components of adjusted net income are derived solely from the impact of the items listed above. we have not factored in the impact of any other differences in experience that might have occurred if we had discovered and developed those intangible assets on our own, and this approach does not intend to be representative of the results that would have occurred in those circumstances. for example, our r&d costs in total, and in the periods presented, may have been different; our speed to commercialization and resulting revenue, if any, may have been different; or our costs to manufacture may have been different. in addition, our marketing efforts may have been received differently by our customers. as such, in total, there can be no assurance that our adjusted net income amounts would have been the same as presented had we discovered and developed the acquired intangible assets. acquisition and divestiture-related costs adjusted net income is calculated prior to considering transaction, integration and disintegration costs associated with significant business combinations, net asset acquisitions and divestitures. these incremental costs are excluded as they are incurred to acquire and integrate, or dispose and disintegrate, certain businesses as a result of the acquisition or disposal decision and are unique to each transaction. we have made no adjustments for the resulting synergies from these transactions. we believe that viewing income prior to considering these charges provides investors with a useful additional perspective because the significant costs incurred in a business combination, net asset acquisition or divestiture result primarily from the need to eliminate duplicate assets, activities or employees––a natural result of acquiring or disposing of a fully integrated set of activities. for this reason, we believe that the costs incurred to convert disparate systems, to close duplicative facilities or to eliminate duplicate positions (for example, in the context of a business combination) can be viewed differently from those costs incurred in the ordinary course of business. the integration and disintegration costs associated with a business combination, asset acquisition or divestiture may occur over several years, with the more significant impacts generally ending within three years of the transaction. because of the need for certain external approvals for some actions, the span of time needed to achieve certain restructuring and integration or disintegration activities can be lengthy. for example, due to the regulated nature of the animal health medicines, vaccines and diagnostic business, the closure of excess facilities can take several years, as all manufacturing changes are subject to extensive validation and testing and must be approved by the u.s. food and drug administration and/or other regulatory authorities. 42 | certain significant items adjusted net income is calculated excluding certain significant items. certain significant items represent substantive, unusual items that are evaluated on an individual basis. such evaluation considers both the quantitative and the qualitative aspect of their unusual nature. unusual, in this context, may represent items that are not part of our ongoing business; items that, either as a result of their nature or size, we would not expect to occur as part of our normal business on a regular basis; items that would be nonrecurring; or items that relate to products that we no longer sell. while not all-inclusive, examples of items that could be included as certain significant items would be costs related to a major non-acquisition or divestiture-related restructuring charge and associated implementation costs for a program that is specific in nature with a defined term, such as those related to our non-acquisition or divestiture-related cost-reduction and productivity initiatives; amounts related to disposals of products or facilities that do not qualify as discontinued operations as defined by u.s. gaap; certain asset impairment charges; adjustments related to the resolution of certain tax positions; significant currency devaluation; the impact of adopting certain significant, event-driven tax legislation; or charges related to legal matters. see notes to consolidated financial statements— note 18. commitments and contingencies. our normal, ongoing defense costs or settlements of and accruals on legal matters made in the normal course of our business would not be considered certain significant items. reconciliation a reconciliation of net income attributable to zoetis, as reported under u.s. gaap, to adjusted net income follows: year ended december 31,% change (millions of dollars)20242023202224/2323/22 gaap reported net income attributable to zoetis$2,486 $2,344 $2,114 6 11 purchase accounting adjustments—net of tax109 127 120 (14)6 acquisition and divestiture-related costs—net of tax14 7 4 *75 certain significant items—net of tax84 (21)59 ** non-gaap adjusted net income(a) $2,693 $2,457 $2,297 10 7 * calculation not meaningful. (a) the effective tax rate on adjusted pretax income was 19.8%, 20.1% and 20.3% in 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. the lower effective tax rate for 2024, as compared to 2023, was primarily attributable to a higher benefit in the u.s. related to foreign-derived intangible income and lower net discrete tax expenses, partially offset by a less favorable jurisdictional mix of earnings (which includes the impact of the location of earnings, repatriation costs and pillar two global minimum tax). jurisdictional mix of earnings can vary depending on repatriation decisions, operating fluctuations in the normal course of business and the impact of non-deductible and non-taxable items. the lower effective tax rate for 2023, as compared to 2022, was primarily attributable to a higher benefit in the u.s. related to foreign-derived intangible income, a more favorable jurisdictional mix of earnings (which includes the impact of the location of earnings and repatriation costs), partially offset by a higher net discrete tax expense in 2023, mainly related to changes to prior years’ tax positions. jurisdictional mix of earnings can vary depending on repatriation decisions, operating fluctuations in the normal course of business and the impact of non-deductible and non-taxable items. a reconciliation of reported diluted earnings per share (eps), as reported under u.s. gaap, to non-gaap adjusted diluted eps follows: year ended december 31,% change 20242023202224/2323/22 earnings per share—diluted(a): gaap reported eps attributable to zoetis—diluted$5.47 $5.07 $4.49 8 13 purchase accounting adjustments—net of tax0.24 0.28 0.26 (14)8 acquisition and divestiture-related costs—net of tax0.03 0.02 0.01 50 * certain significant items—net of tax0.18 (0.05)0.12 ** non-gaap adjusted eps—diluted$5.92 $5.32 $4.88 11 9 * calculation not meaningful. (a) diluted earnings per share was computed using the weighted-average common shares outstanding during the period plus the common stock equivalents related to stock options, restricted stock units, performance-vesting restricted stock units and deferred stock units. adjusted net income includes the following for each of the periods presented: year ended december 31, (millions of dollars)202420232022 interest expense, net of capitalized interest$225 $239 $221 interest income(106)(103)(50) income taxes667 618 583 depreciation323 302 266 amortization34 36 40 43 | adjusted net income, as shown above, excludes the following items: year ended december 31, (millions of dollars)202420232022 purchase accounting adjustments: amortization and depreciation$140 $153 $160 cost of sales— 6 — total purchase accounting adjustments—pre-tax140 159 160 income taxes(a) 31 32 40 total purchase accounting adjustments—net of tax109 127 120 acquisition and divestiture-related costs: acquisition-related costs1 7 5 divestiture-related costs(b) 16 — — restructuring costs1 2 — total acquisition and divestiture-related costs—pre-tax18 9 5 income taxes(a) 4 2 1 total acquisition and divestiture-related costs—net of tax14 7 4 certain significant items: other restructuring charges and cost-reduction/productivity initiatives(c) 35 44 8 certain asset impairment charges(d) 11 24 47 net loss/(gain) on sale of businesses(e) 25 (101)— other8 — 1 total certain significant items—pre-tax79 (33)56 income taxes(a) (5)(12)(3) total certain significant items—net of tax84 (21)59 total purchase accounting adjustments, acquisition and divestiture-related costs, and certain significant items—net of tax$207 $113 $183 (a) income taxes include the tax effect of the associated pre-tax amounts, calculated by determining the jurisdictional location of the pre-tax amounts and applying that jurisdiction's applicable tax rate. income taxes in purchase accounting adjustments also includes: •for 2022, tax benefits related to a deferred adjustment as a result of a change in tax basis. income taxes in certain significant items also includes: •for 2024, a tax expense related to the divestiture of the medicated feed additive product portfolio, certain water soluble products and related assets. •for 2023, a benefit from the tax loss on the divestiture of performance livestock analytics, partially offset by a tax expense related to changes to prior years’ tax positions with regard to the one-time mandatory deemed repatriation tax under the tax cuts and jobs act. •for 2022, a tax expense related to changes in valuation allowances related to impairments of certain assets and changes in uncertain tax positions. (b) represents costs related to the sale of our medicated feed additive product portfolio, certain water soluble products and related assets. (c) for 2024, primarily consisted of employee termination costs related to organizational structure refinements, partially offset by a reversal of certain employee termination costs as a result of a change in strategy from our 2015 operational efficiency initiative. for 2023, primarily represents employee termination and exit costs related to organizational structure refinements and other cost-reduction and productivity initiatives. for 2022, primarily represents employee termination and exit costs associated with cost-reduction and productivity initiatives in certain international markets, as well as product transfer costs. (d) for 2024, represents certain asset impairment charges related to our aquaculture business. for 2023, primarily represents certain asset impairment charges related to our precision animal health and diagnostics businesses. for 2022, primarily represents asset impairment charges related to: •customer relationships, developed technology rights and property, plant and equipment in our diagnostics, poultry, cattle and swine businesses; and •inventory and other charges related to the consolidation of manufacturing sites in china. (e) for 2024, represents a net loss related to the sale of our medicated feed additive product portfolio, certain water soluble products and related assets. for 2023, primarily represents a net gain on the sale of a majority interest in our pet insurance business. 44 | the classification of the above items excluded from adjusted net income are as follows: year ended december 31, (millions of dollars)202420232022 cost of sales: purchase accounting adjustments$4 $10 $6 inventory write-offs— 2 4 other1 1 4 total cost of sales5 13 14 selling, general & administrative expenses: purchase accounting adjustments11 21 29 other6 — — total selling, general & administrative expenses17 21 29 research & development expenses: purchase accounting adjustments2 1 1 total research & development expenses2 1 1 amortization of intangible assets: purchase accounting adjustments123 127 124 total amortization of intangible assets123 127 124 restructuring charges and certain acquisition and divestiture-related costs: acquisition-related costs1 7 5 divestiture-related costs16 — — employee termination costs36 41 3 asset impairments— 1 2 exit costs— 4 1 total restructuring charges and certain acquisition and divestiture-related costs53 53 11 other (income)/deductions—net: asset impairments11 21 41 net loss/(gain) on sale of businesses25 (101)— other1 — 1 total other (income)/deductions—net37 (80)42 provision for taxes on income30 22 38 total purchase accounting adjustments, acquisition and divestiture-related costs, and certain significant items—net of tax$207 $113 $183 analysis of the consolidated statements of comprehensive income changes in other comprehensive income for the periods presented are primarily related to foreign currency translation adjustments and unrealized gains/(losses) on derivative instruments. the foreign currency translation adjustment changes result from the strengthening or weakening of the u.s. dollar as compared to the currencies in the countries in which we do business. unrealized gains/(losses) on the changes in the fair value of derivative instruments are recorded within accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) and reclassified into earnings depending on the nature and purpose of the financial instrument, as described in note 9. financial instruments of the notes to consolidated financial statements. analysis of the consolidated balance sheets december 31, 2024 vs. december 31, 2023 for a discussion about the changes in cash and cash equivalents, short-term borrowings, current portion of long-term debt and long-term debt, net of discount and issuance costs, see “analysis of financial condition, liquidity and capital resources” below. inventories decreased primarily due to the divestiture of our medicated feed additive product portfolio, certain water soluble products and related assets, as well as higher sales than anticipated for certain products, partially offset by the build-up of certain products for increased demand. see notes to consolidated financial statements - note 11. inventories. other current assets decreased primarily due to lower value-added tax receivables for our international markets and the deferral of a prepaid tax benefit in connection with a prepayment from a related foreign entity in belgium, partially offset by the mark-to-market adjustment of derivative instruments and the jurisdictional netting of income taxes receivable and income taxes payable. 45 | property, plant and equipment less accumulated depreciation increased primarily as a result of capital spending, partially offset by depreciation expense, as well as the divestiture of our medicated feed additive product portfolio, certain water soluble products and related assets. see notes to consolidated financial statements - note 12. property, plant and equipment. identifiable intangible assets, less accumulated amortization decreased primarily as a result of amortization expense, the divestiture of our medicated feed additive product portfolio, certain water soluble products and related assets, as well as certain asset impairment charges. the net changes in noncurrent deferred tax assets, noncurrent deferred tax liabilities, income taxes payable and other taxes payable primarily reflect adjustments to the accrual for the income tax provision, the timing of income tax payments and the tax impact of various acquisitions and divestitures. other noncurrent assets increased primarily due to capitalized cloud computing arrangements implementation costs. accounts payable increased as a result of the timing of vendor and value-added tax payments. dividends payable increased as a result of an increase in the dividend rate for the first quarter 2025 dividend, which was declared on december 12, 2024. accrued expenses increased primarily as a result of accrued contract rebates and the timing of payments for other accrued expenses. accrued compensation and related items increased primarily due to the accrual of 2024 annual incentive bonuses, sales incentive bonuses and savings plan contributions to eligible employees, partially offset by the payments of 2023 annual incentive bonuses and sales incentive bonuses, as well as savings plan contributions to eligible employees. other current liabilities increased primarily due to collateral received related to derivative contracts, partially offset by the mark-to-market adjustment of derivative instruments. the decrease in operating lease liabilities reflects lease amortization and payments, partially offset by assets acquired through new lease obligations. see notes to consolidated financial statements—note 10. leases. other noncurrent liabilities decreased primarily due to the reversal of certain employee termination costs as a result of a change in strategy from our 2015 operational efficiency initiative and the divestiture of our medicated feed additive product portfolio, certain water soluble products and related assets. for an analysis of the changes in total equity, see the consolidated statements of equity and notes to consolidated financial statements— note 16. stockholders' equity. analysis of the consolidated statements of cash flows year ended december 31,$ change (millions of dollars)20242023202224/2323/22 net cash provided by (used in): operating activities$2,953 $2,353 $1,912 $600 $441 investing activities(315)(777)(883)462 106 financing activities(2,660)(3,109)(904)449 (2,205) effect of exchange-rate changes on cash and cash equivalents(32)(7)(29)(25)22 net (decrease)/increase in cash and cash equivalents$(54)$(1,540)$96 $1,486 $(1,636) operating activities 2024 vs. 2023 net cash provided by operating activities was $2,953 million in 2024 compared with $2,353 million in 2023. the increase in operating cash flows was primarily attributable to higher inventory build-up of certain products in the prior period for increased demand and to mitigate potential supply constraints and the timing of receipts and payments in the ordinary course of business, as well as higher net income adjusted by non-cash items. investing activities 2024 vs. 2023 net cash used in investing activities was $315 million in 2024 compared with $777 million in 2023. the net cash used in investing activities for 2024 was primarily due to capital expenditures, partially offset by net proceeds on the sale of our medicated feed additive product portfolio, certain water soluble products and related assets, as well as net proceeds from derivative instrument activity. the net cash used in investing activities for 2023 was primarily due to capital expenditures and acquisitions, partially offset by net proceeds on the sale of a majority interest in our pet insurance business and net proceeds from derivative instrument activity. financing activities 2024 vs. 2023 net cash used in financing activities was $2,660 million in 2024 compared with $3,109 million in 2023. the net cash used in financing activities for 2024 was primarily attributable to the purchase of treasury shares and related payment of excise taxes, the payment of dividends and taxes paid on withholding shares, partially offset by proceeds in connection with the issuance of common stock under our equity incentive plan. the net cash used in financing activities for 2023 was primarily attributable to the repayment of the $1.35 billion aggregate principal amount of our 2013 senior notes due 2023 in february 2023, the purchase of treasury shares, the payment of dividends and taxes paid on withholding shares, partially offset by proceeds in connection with the issuance of common stock under our equity incentive plan. 46 | analysis of financial condition, liquidity and capital resources while we believe our cash and cash equivalents on hand, our operating cash flows and our existing financing arrangements will be sufficient to support our cash needs for the next twelve months and beyond, this may be subject to the environment in which we operate. risks to our meeting future funding requirements are described in global economic conditions below. selected measures of liquidity and capital resources certain relevant measures of our liquidity and capital resources follow: december 31, (millions of dollars)20242023 cash and cash equivalents$1,987 $2,041 accounts receivable, net(a) 1,316 1,304 short-term borrowings— 3 current portion of long-term debt1,350 — long-term debt5,220 6,564 working capital2,574 4,454 ratio of current assets to current liabilities1.75:13.36:1 (a) accounts receivable are usually collected over a period of 45 to 75 days. for the years ended december 31, 2024 and 2023, the number of days that accounts receivables were outstanding have remained within this range. we regularly monitor our accounts receivable for collectability, particularly in markets where economic conditions remain uncertain. we believe that our allowance for doubtful accounts is appropriate. our assessment is based on such factors as past due aging, historical and expected collection patterns, the financial condition of our customers, the robust nature of our credit and collection practices and the economic environment. for additional information about the sources and uses of our funds, see the analysis of the consolidated balance sheets and analysis of the consolidated statements of cash flows sections of this md&a. credit facility and other lines of credit in december 2022, we entered into an amended and restated revolving credit agreement with a syndicate of banks providing for a multi-year $1.0 billion senior unsecured revolving credit facility (the credit facility), which expires in december 2027. subject to certain conditions, we have the right to increase the credit facility up to $1.5 billion. the credit facility contains a financial covenant requiring us to not exceed a maximum total leverage ratio (the ratio of consolidated net debt as of the end of the period to consolidated earnings before interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization (ebitda) for such period) of 3.50:1. upon entering into a material acquisition, the maximum total leverage ratio increases to 4.00:1, and extends until the fourth full consecutive fiscal quarter ended immediately following the consummation of a material acquisition. in addition, the credit facility contains other customary covenants. we were in compliance with all financial covenants as of december 31, 2024 and december 31, 2023. there were no amounts drawn under the credit facility as of december 31, 2024 or december 31, 2023. we have additional lines of credit and other credit arrangements with a group of banks and other financial intermediaries for general corporate purposes. we maintain cash and cash equivalent balances in excess of our outstanding short-term borrowings. as of december 31, 2024, we had access to $50 million of lines of credit which expire at various times and are generally renewed annually. there were no borrowings outstanding related to these facilities as of december 31, 2024 and $3 million of borrowings outstanding related to these facilities as of december 31, 2023. domestic and international short-term funds many of our operations are conducted outside the u.s. the amount of funds held in the u.s. will fluctuate due to the timing of receipts and payments in the ordinary course of business and due to other reasons, such as business development activities. as part of our ongoing liquidity assessments, we regularly monitor the mix of u.s. and international cash flows (both inflows and outflows). actual repatriation of overseas funds can result in additional u.s. and local income taxes, such as u.s. state income taxes, local withholding taxes, and taxes on currency gains and losses. see notes to consolidated financial statements—note 8. tax matters. global economic conditions global financial markets may be impacted by macroeconomic, business and financial volatility. challenging economic conditions in recent years have not had, nor do we anticipate that it will have, a significant impact on our liquidity. due to our operating cash flows, financial assets, access to capital markets and available lines of credit and revolving credit agreements, we continue to believe that we have the ability to meet our liquidity needs for the foreseeable future. as markets change, we continue to monitor our liquidity position. there can be no assurance that a challenging economic environment or an economic downturn will not impact our liquidity or our ability to obtain financing in the future. 47 | contractual obligations in the normal course of business, we enter into contracts and commitments that obligate us to make payments in the future. these obligations include long-term debt, including interest obligations, purchase obligations, lease commitments, other liabilities, benefit plan obligations and uncertain tax positions. see notes to consolidated financial statements—note 9. financial instruments, note 18. commitments and contingencies, note 10. leases, note 6. restructuring charges and other costs associated with acquisitions and divestitures, note 14. benefit plans and note 8. tax matters for further information on material cash requirements from known contractual and other obligations. debt securities on november 8, 2022, we issued $1.35 billion aggregate principal amount of our senior notes (2022 senior notes), with an original issue discount of $2 million. these notes are comprised of $600 million aggregate principal amount of 5.400% senior notes due 2025 and $750 million aggregate principal amount of 5.600% senior notes due 2032. on february 1, 2023, the net proceeds were used to redeem in full, upon maturity, the $1.35 billion aggregate principal amount of our 3.250% 2013 senior notes due 2023. our senior notes are governed by an indenture and supplemental indentures (collectively, the indenture) between us and deutsche bank trust company americas, as trustee. the indenture contains certain covenants, including limitations on our and certain of our subsidiaries' ability to incur liens or engage in sale lease-back transactions. the indenture also contains restrictions on our ability to consolidate, merge or sell substantially all of our assets. in addition, the indenture contains other customary terms, including certain events of default, upon the occurrence of which, the senior notes may be declared immediately due and payable. pursuant to the indenture, we are able to redeem the senior notes of any series, in whole or in part, at any time by paying a “make whole” premium, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the date of redemption. upon the occurrence of a change of control of us and a downgrade of the senior notes below an investment grade rating by each of moody's investors service, inc. and standard & poor's ratings services, we are, in certain circumstances, required to make an offer to repurchase all of the outstanding senior notes at a price equal to 101% of the aggregate principal amount of the senior notes together with accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the date of repurchase. our outstanding debt securities are as follows: descriptionprincipal amountinterest rateterms 2015 senior notes due 2025$750 million4.500%interest due semi annually, not subject to amortization, aggregate principal due on november 13, 2025 2022 senior notes due 2025$600 million5.400%interest due semi annually, not subject to amortization, aggregate principal due on november 14, 2025 2017 senior notes due 2027$750 million3.000%interest due semi annually, not subject to amortization, aggregate principal due on september 12, 2027 2018 senior notes due 2028$500 million3.900%interest due semi annually, not subject to amortization, aggregate principal due on august 20, 2028 2020 senior notes due 2030$750 million2.000%interest due semi annually, not subject to amortization, aggregate principal due on may 15, 2030 2022 senior notes due 2032$750 million5.600%interest due semi annually, not subject to amortization, aggregate principal due on november 16, 2032 2013 senior notes due 2043$1,150 million4.700%interest due semi annually, not subject to amortization, aggregate principal due on february 1, 2043 2017 senior notes due 2047$500 million3.950%interest due semi annually, not subject to amortization, aggregate principal due on september 12, 2047 2018 senior notes due 2048$400 million4.450%interest due semi annually, not subject to amortization, aggregate principal due on august 20, 2048 2020 senior notes due 2050$500 million3.000%interest due semi annually, not subject to amortization, aggregate principal due on may 15, 2050 credit ratings two major corporate debt-rating organizations, moody's and s&p, assign ratings to our short-term and long-term debt. a security rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold securities and the rating is subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the rating organization. each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating. the following table provides the current ratings assigned by these rating agencies to our commercial paper and senior unsecured non-credit-enhanced long-term debt: commercial paperlong-term debtdate of last action name of rating agencyratingratingoutlook moody’sp-2a3stablejanuary 2025 s&pa-2bbbstabledecember 2016 pension obligations as part of the separation from pfizer, pfizer transferred to us the net pension obligations associated with certain international defined benefit plans. we expect to contribute a total of $6 million to these plans in 2025. as of december 31, 2024, the supplemental savings plan liability was $48 million. for additional information, see notes to consolidated financial statements— note 14. benefit plans. share repurchase program in december 2021, our board of directors authorized a $3.5 billion multi-year share repurchase program. this program was completed as of december 31, 2024. in august 2024, our board of directors authorized a new multi-year share repurchase program of up to $6 billion of our outstanding common stock. as of december 31, 2024, there was $5.6 billion remaining under this authorization. purchases of zoetis shares may be made at the discretion of management, depending on market conditions and business needs. share repurchases may be executed through various 48 | means, including open market or privately negotiated transactions. during 2024, 10.4 million shares were repurchased for $1.8 billion, which excludes a $17 million accrual for excise tax on net share repurchases. off-balance sheet arrangements in the ordinary course of business and in connection with the sale of assets and businesses, we may indemnify our counterparties against certain liabilities that may arise in connection with a transaction or that are related to activities prior to a transaction. these indemnifications typically pertain to environmental, tax, employee and/or product-related matters, and patent-infringement claims. if the indemnified party were to make a successful claim pursuant to the terms of the indemnification, we would be required to reimburse the loss. these indemnifications are generally subject to threshold amounts, specified claim periods and other restrictions and limitations. historically, we have not paid significant amounts under these provisions and, as of december 31, 2024 and 2023, recorded amounts for the estimated fair value of these indemnifications are not material. new accounting standards see note 3. significant accounting policies in the notes to consolidated financial statements for discussion of recent accounting pronouncements, including the respective dates of adoption or expected adoption and effects or expected effects on our consolidated financial position, results of operations and cash flows. 49 | forward-looking statements and factors that may affect future results this report contains “forward-looking” statements. we intend such forward-looking statements to be covered by the safe harbor provisions for forward-looking statements contained in section 27a of the securities act of 1933 and section 21e of the securities exchange act of 1934. we generally identify forward-looking statements by using words such as “anticipate,” “estimate,” “could,” “expect,” “intend,” “project,” “plan,” “predict,” “believe,” “seek,” “continue,” “outlook,” “forecast,” “objective,” “target,” “may,” “might,” “will,” “should,” “can have,” “likely” or the negative version of these words or comparable words or by using future dates in connection with any discussion of future performance, actions or events. in particular, forward-looking statements include statements relating to our future actions, business plans or prospects, prospective products, product approvals or products under development, product and supply chain disruptions, r&d costs, timing and likelihood of success, future operating or financial performance, future results of current and anticipated products and services, strategies, sales efforts, expenses, production efficiencies, production margins, anticipated timing of generic market entries, integration of acquired businesses, anticipated impact or timing of divestitures, interest rates, tax rates, tariffs, changes in tax regimes and laws, foreign exchange rates, growth in emerging markets, the outcome of contingencies, such as legal proceedings, plans related to share repurchases and dividends, government regulation, taxes and financial results. these statements are not guarantees of future performance, actions or events. forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties, many of which are beyond our control, and are based on assumptions that could prove to be inaccurate. among the factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from past results and future plans and projected future results are the following: •the possible impact and timing of competing products, including generic alternatives, on our products and our ability to compete against such products; •unanticipated safety, quality or efficacy concerns or issues about our products; •the economic, political, legal and business environment of the foreign jurisdictions in which we do business; •the decline in global economic conditions, including the regional conflict in the middle east, economic weakness in china and inflation; •consolidation of our customers and distributors; •changes in the distribution channel for companion animal products; •an outbreak of infectious disease carried by animals; •disruptive innovations and advances in medical practices and technologies; •failure to successfully acquire businesses, license rights or products, integrate businesses, form and manage alliances or divest businesses; •restrictions and bans on the use of and consumer preferences regarding antibacterials in food-producing animals; •perceived adverse effects linked to the consumption of food derived from animals that utilize our products or animals generally; •increased regulation or decreased governmental support relating to the raising, processing or consumption of food-producing animals; •modification of foreign trade policy by the u.s. or other countries or the imposition of tariffs on imported or exported goods; •adverse weather conditions and the availability of natural resources; •the impact of climate change on our activities and the activities of our customers and suppliers; •an inability to hire and retain executive officers and other key personnel; •product launch delays, inventory shortages, recalls or unanticipated costs caused by manufacturing problems and capacity imbalances; •failure of our r&d, acquisition and licensing efforts to generate new products and product lifecycle innovations; •difficulties or delays in the development or commercialization of new products; •illegal distribution and/or sale of our products or the misuse or off-label use of our products; •legal factors, including product liability claims, antitrust litigation and governmental investigations, including tax disputes, environmental concerns, laws and regulations regarding data privacy, commercial disputes and patent disputes with branded and generic competitors, any of which could preclude commercialization of products or negatively affect the profitability of existing products; •fluctuations in foreign exchange rates and potential currency controls; •a cyberattack, information security breach or other misappropriation of our data; •governmental laws and regulations affecting domestic and foreign operations, including without limitation, tax obligations and changes affecting the tax treatment by the u.s. of income earned outside the u.s. that may result from pending or possible future proposals; •failure to protect our intellectual property rights or to operate our business without infringing the intellectual property rights of others; •failure to generate sufficient cash to service our substantial indebtedness; and •the other factors set forth under “risk factors” in item 1a of part i of this 2024 annual report. however, there may also be other risks that we are unable to predict at this time. these risks or uncertainties may cause actual results to differ materially from those contemplated by a forward-looking statement. you should not put undue reliance on forward-looking statements. forward-looking statements speak only as of the date on which they are made. we undertake no obligation to publicly update forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by law or by the rules and regulations of the sec. you are advised, however, to consult any further disclosures we make on related subjects in our form 10-q and 8-k reports and our other filings with the sec. you should understand that it is not possible to predict or identify all such factors. consequently, you should not consider the above to be a complete discussion of all potential risks or uncertainties. 50 |